
B. EXTENSIVE AND INTENSIVE QUANTUM

a. Their difference

1. We have seen that quantum has
its determinateness as limit in amount.
In itself quantum is discrete, a plurality
which does not have a being different
from its limit or its limit outside it.
Quantum, thus with its limit
which as limit is a plurality,
is extensive magnitude.

Extensive magnitude is to be distinguished from continuous magnitude;
its direct opposite is not the discrete, but the intensive magnitude.
Extensive and intensive magnitudes are determinacies of
the quantitative limit itself,
whereas quantum is identical with its limit;
continuous and discrete magnitudes are, on the contrary,
determinations of magnitude in itself,
that is, of quantity as such, in so far as
in quantum abstraction is made from the limit.
Extensive magnitude has the moment of continuity in it
in its limit, for its many is everywhere continuous;
the limit as negation appears, therefore,
in this equality of the many as a limiting of the unity.
Continuous magnitude is quantity that continues
without regard to any limit,
and in so far as it is represented with one such limit,
the latter is a limitation in general,
without discreteness being posited in it.
Determined as only continuous magnitude,
quantum is not yet determined for itself
because the magnitude lacks the one
(in which the determinateness-for-itself lies)
and number.
Similarly, a discrete magnitude is
immediately only a differentiated many in general
which, if it were to have a limit as a many,
would be only an aggregate,
that is, would be only indeterminately limited;
in order for quantum to be determinate,
the many must be concentrated
into one and thereby be posited as identical with the limit.
Continuous and discrete magnitude, taken as quantum in general,
have each posited in it only one of the two sides
by virtue of which quantum is fully determined and a number.
Taken immediately, this latter is extensive quantum
the simple determinateness which is amount essentially,
but the amount of one and the same unit;
extensive quantum is distinguished from number
only because in the latter the determinateness is
explicitly posited as plurality.

2. However, the determinateness through number
[how much there is of something]
does not require being distinguished from
how much there is of something else,
as if to the determinateness of one thing belonged
how much there is of it
and how much there is of an other,
for the determinateness of magnitude as such
is a limit determined for itself,
indifferent and simply self-referring;
and in number this limit is posited
as enclosed within the one existing for itself:
the externality that it has,
the reference to other, is inside it.
Further, like the many in general,
this many of the limit is
not internally unequal but continuous;
each many is what any other many is;
consequently, the many as a many of
existents outside one another,
or as discrete, does not constitute
the determinateness as such.
Thus this many collapses for itself
into its continuity and becomes simple unity.
Amount is but a moment of number;
but, as an aggregate of numerical ones,
it does not constitute the determinateness of number;
on the contrary, these ones as indifferent and self-external are
sublated in number whose being has turned back into itself;
the externality that constituted the ones of plurality vanishes
in the one as the self-reference of number.

The limit of quantum which, as extensive,
had its existent determinateness as self-external number,
thus passes over into simple determinateness.
In this simple determination of limit,
quantum is intensive magnitude;
and the limit or the determinateness
which is identical with quantum is now
also posited as simple: it is degree.
Degree is thus a determinate magnitude, a quantum,
but at the same time it is not an aggregate
or several within itself;
it is only a plurality;
plurality is a severality that has gathered
together into simple determination,
it is existence that has returned into being-for-itself.
It is true that its determinateness must be expressed by a number,
which is the being of the quantum as completely determined,
but the number is not an amount or a how many times
but is rather a onefold, only a degree.
When we speak of 10 or 20 degrees,
the quantum which has that many degrees
[the tenth, the twentieth degree]
is not the amount and sum of the degrees;
if that were the case, it would be an extensive quantum;
it is rather only that one degree, the tenth, the twentieth.
It does contain the determinateness found in
the number ten or twenty,
but not as several ones:
the number is there as a sublated amount,
as a simple determinateness.

3. In number, quantum is posited in its complete determinateness;
but as intensive quantum, in the being-for-itself of number,
it is posited as it is according to its concept or implicitly in itself.
For the form of self-reference which it has in degree is
at the same time the externality of degree to itself.
As extensive quantum, number is a numerical plurality
and thus has externality inside it.
This externality, as plurality in general,
collapses into a state of undifferentiatedness
and is sublated into the numerical one,
the self-reference of number.
But quantum has its determinateness as number;
it contains this determinateness, as we have said,
whether the latter is posited in it or not.
Degree, therefore, which as internally simple no
longer has this external otherness in it, has it outside it,
and refers to it as to its determinateness.
A plurality external to it constitutes the determinateness
of the simple limit which the degree is for itself.
In so far as in the extensive quantum
amount was supposed to be found within number,
it was sublated there;
now, as thus sublated, amount is posited outside number.
Number, in being posited as a one,
as self-reference reflected into itself,
excludes from itself the indifference and the externality of amount
and is self-reference as reference to an external through itself.

In this, quantum has the reality which is adequate to its concept.
The indifference of the determinateness constitutes its quality,
that is, a determinateness which is in it
as a determinateness external to itself.
Accordingly, degree is a unitary quantitative determinateness
among a plurality of such intensities
which, though diverse, each being only a simple reference to itself,
are at the same time in essential connection with each other,
so that each has its determinateness in this continuity with the others.
This reference connecting a degree through itself to its other
makes ascent and descent on the scale of degrees
a continuous progress, a flow,
which is an uninterrupted and indivisible alteration;
none of the “more or less” differentiated within it
is separate from the others
but each has its determinateness only in these others.
As a self-referring quantitative determination,
each degree is indifferent towards the others;
but, in itself, it equally refers to this externality;
it is what it is only through
the intermediary of this externality;
in short, its reference to itself is not
an indifferent reference to externality
but in this externality it possesses its quality.

b. Identity of extensive and intensive magnitude

Degree is not inherently external to itself.
It is not, however, the indeterminate one,
is not the principle of number as such
which is not amount except negatively,
that is, only in the sense of not being an amount.
Intensive magnitude is at first a simple one
of many “more or less”;
there are several degrees;
but they are not determined either as a unitary one or as a more or
less but only as referring to each other as outside each other,
or in the identity of the one and the “more or less than.”
Thus, although the several “more
or less” are as such indeed outside the unitary degree,
the determinateness of the latter lies nonetheless
in its connection with them;
the degree thus contains amount.
Just as twenty contains as extensive magnitude
twenty ones as discrete,
the specific degree contains them as continuity,
a continuity which simply is this determinate plurality;
it is the twentieth degree,
and it is this twentieth degree
only through the intermediate of this amount
which, as such, is outside it.

The determinateness of the intensive magnitude is
to be considered, therefore, from two sides.
It is determined through other intensive quanta
and is continuous with its otherness,
so that its determinateness consists
in this connection with it.
Now, in so far as this determinateness is,
first, a simple determinateness,
it is determined as against the other degrees;
it excludes them from itself
and has its determinateness in this exclusion.
But, second, it is determined within;
this it is in the amount as its amount,
not in the amount as excluded,
or not in the amount of the other degrees.
The twentieth degree contains the twenty within itself;
it is not only determined as distinguished from the nineteenth,
the twenty-first, etc.,
but its determinateness is rather its amount.
But, inasmuch as the amount is its own,
and the determinateness is at the same time
essentially as amount, the degree is extensive quantum.

Extensive and intensive magnitude are, therefore,
one and the same determinateness of quantum;
they are distinguished only inasmuch as
the one has the amount within
and the other has the same without.
Extensive magnitude passes over into intensive magnitude
because its many collapses in and for itself
into oneness and steps outside it.
But, conversely, this simple one
has its determinateness only in the amount, its amount;
indifferent to the otherwise determined intensities,
it has the externality of amount in it;
thus intensive magnitude is just as essentially extensive magnitude.

With this identity, the qualitative something comes on the scene;
for the identity is the unity that refers back to itself
through the negation of its distinct terms;
these terms, however, make up the determinateness of
the existent magnitude.
The something is a quantum, but its qualitative existence is
now posited as indifferent to it as it is in itself.
One can speak of quantum, number as such, etc.,
without any mention of a something as their substrate.
But the something, self-mediated by virtue of the negation
of its determinations, now confronts these as existing for itself,
and, since it has a quantum, it confronts them as something
which has an extensive and intensive quantum.
Its one determinateness which it has as quantum
is posited in the distinct moments of unity and amount;
it is in itself not only one and the same determinateness,
but the positing of it in these differences as
extensive and intensive quantum is the return into this unity
which, as negative, is the something posited as indifferent to them.

c. Alteration of quantum

The difference between extensive and intensive quantum is
indifferent to the determinateness of quantum as quantum.
But quantum is in general
determinateness posited as sublated:
the indifferent limit, the determinateness
which is just as much the negation of itself.
In extensive quantum, this difference is developed;
but intensive magnitude is the existence of
this externality which quantum is in itself.
The difference is posited as the contradiction which it is in itself,
of being a simple self-referring determinateness
which is the negation of itself,
of having its determinateness not in it
but in another quantum.

A quantum, according to its quality, is therefore
in absolute continuity with its externality, with its otherness.
Consequently, not only can every determinateness of magnitude
be transcended, not only can it be altered:
that it must alter is now posited.
The determination of magnitude continues
into its otherness in such a way that
it has its being only in this continuity with an other;
it is not just a limit that exists but one that becomes.

The one is infinite or self-referring negation,
and hence the repulsion of itself from itself.
Quantum is equally infinite,
posited as the self-referring negation;
it repels itself from itself.
But it is a determinate “one,”
the one which has passed over into existence and limit,
thus the repulsion of determinateness from itself,
not the generation of something that is like itself
(as the repulsion of the one) but of its otherness;
quantum is now posited in it as sending itself beyond itself.
It consists in this, that it increases or decreases;
it is within it the externality of determinateness.

Thus quantum sends itself beyond itself;
this other which it becomes is at first itself a quantum,
but a quantum which is not a static limit
but one that impels itself beyond itself.
The limit which arises in this beyond is
therefore only one that again sublates itself
and sends itself to a further limit,
and so on to infinity.
