SECTION II

Magnitude (Quantity)

The difference between quantity and quality has been indicated.
Quality is the first, immediate determinateness.
Quantity is the determinateness that
has become indifferent to being;
a limit which is just as much no limit;
being-for-itself which is absolutely
identical with being-for-another:
the repulsion of the many ones
which is immediate non-repulsion,
their continuity.

Because that which exists for itself is now so posited
that it does not exclude its other
but rather affirmatively continues in it,
it is then otherness, inasmuch as
existence surfaces again on this continuity
and its determinateness is at the same time
no longer simple self-reference,
no longer the immediate determinateness
of the existent something,
but is posited as repelling itself from itself,
as referring to itself in the determinateness
rather of an other existence
(a being which exists for itself);
and since they are at the same time indifferent limits,
reflected into themselves and unconnected,
determinateness is as such outside itself,
an absolute externality and a something just as external;
such a limit, the indifference of the limit as limit
and the indifference of the something to the limit,
constitutes the quantitative determinateness of the something.

In the first place, we have to distinguish pure quantity
from quantity as determinate, from quantum.
First, pure quantity is real being-for-itself
turned back into itself, with as yet no determinateness in it:
a compact, infinite unity which continues itself into itself.

Second, this quantity proceeds to determinateness,
and this is posited in it as a determinateness
that at the same time is none, is only external.
Quantity becomes quantum.
Quantum is indifferent determinateness,
that is, one that transcends itself, negates itself;
as this otherness of otherness,
it lapses into infinite progress.
Infinite quantum, however, is
sublated indifferent determinateness:
it is the restoration of quality.

Third, quantum in qualitative form is quantitative ratio.
Quantum transcends itself only in general;
in the ratio, however, it transcends itself into its otherness,
in such a way that this otherness in which it has its determination
is at the same time posited, is another quantum.
With this we have quantum as turned back into itself
and referring to itself as into its otherness.

At the foundation of this relation there still
lies the externality of quantum;
it is indifferent quanta that
relate themselves to each other,
that is, they have the reference
that mutually connects them
in this being-outside-itself.
The ratio is, therefore, only
a formal unity of quality and quantity,
and dialectic is its transition into
their absolute unity, in measure.

CHAPTER 1

Quantity

A. PURE QUANTITY

Quantity is sublated being-for-itself.
The repelling one that behaved only
negatively towards the excluded one,
now that it has gone over in connection with it,
behaves towards the other as identical to itself
and has therefore lost its determination;
being-for-itself has passed over into attraction.
The absolute obduracy of the one has melted away
into this unity which, however, as containing the one, is
at the same time determined by the repulsion residing in it;
as unity of the self-externality, it is unity with itself.
Attraction is in this way the moment of continuity in quantity.

Continuity is therefore simple, self-same reference to itself
unbroken by any limit or exclusion;
not, however, immediate unity but the unity of ones
which have existence for themselves.
Still contained in it is the outside-one-another of plurality,
though at the same time as something without distinctions, unbroken.
Plurality is posited in continuity as it implicitly is in itself;
the many are each what the others are,
each is like the other,
and the plurality is, consequently,
simple and undifferentiated equality.
Continuity is this moment of self-equality
of the outsideness-of-one-another,
the self-continuation of the different ones
into the ones from which they are distinguished.

In continuity, therefore, magnitude immediately possesses
the moment of discreteness, repulsion as now a moment in quantity.
Steady continuity is self-equality,
but of many that do not become exclusive;
it is repulsion that first expands self-equality to continuity.
Hence discreteness is, for its part, a discreteness of confluents,
of ones that do not have the void to connect them,
not the negative, but their own steady advance
and, in the many, do not interrupt this self-equality.

Quantity is the unity of these moments,
of continuity and discreteness.
At first, however, it is this continuity
in the form of one of them, of continuity,
as a result of the dialectic of the being-for-itself
which has collapsed into the form of self-equal immediacy.
Quantity is as such this simple result
in so far as the being-for-itself has
not yet developed its moments
and has not posited them within it.
Quantity contains these moments at first
as being-for-itself posited in its truth.
It was the determination of being-in-itself
to be self-sublating self-reference,
a perpetual coming-out-of-itself.
But what is repelled is itself;
repulsion is thus a creative flowing away from itself.
On account of the sameness of what is repelled,
this discerning is unbroken continuity;
and on account of the coming-out-of-itself,
this continuity is at the same time,
without being broken off, a plurality,
a plurality which persists just as
immediately in its equality with itself.

B. CONTINUOUS AND DISCRETE MAGNITUDE

1. Quantity contains the two moments of continuity and discreteness.
It is to be posited in both, in each as its determination.
It is already from the start the immediate unity of the two,
that is, quantity is itself posited at first
only in one of the two determinations, that of continuity,
and as such is continuous magnitude.

Or continuity is indeed one of the moments of quantity
which is brought to completion only with the other, discreteness.
But quantity is concrete unity only in so far as
it is the unity of distinct moments.
These are to be taken, therefore, also as distinct,
without however resolving them again
into attraction and repulsion
but, rather, as they truly are,
each remaining in its unity with the other,
that is, remaining the whole.
Continuity is only the compact unity
holding together as unity of the discrete;
posited as such, it is no longer only moment
but the whole quantity: continuous magnitude.

2. Immediate quantity is continuous magnitude.
Quantity, however, is not as such an immediate;
immediacy is a determinateness,
the sublated being of which is precisely quantity.
Quantity is to be posited, therefore,
in the determinateness immanent to it,
and this is the one.
Quantity is discrete magnitude.

Discreteness is, like continuity, a moment of quantity,
but is itself also the whole quantity
just because it is a moment in it, the whole,
and therefore as distinct moment does not
diverge from its unity with the other moment.
Quantity is the outsideness-of-one-another as such,
and continuous magnitude is this outsideness-of-one-another
onwardly positing itself without negation
as an internally self-same connectedness.
On the other hand, discrete magnitude is this
outsideness-of-one-another as discontinuous, as broken off.
With this aggregate of ones, however,
the aggregate of atom and void,
repulsion in general, is not thereby reinstated.
Because discrete magnitude is quantity,
its discreteness is itself continuous.
Such a continuity in the discrete consists
in the ones being the same as one another,
or in that they have the same unity.
Discrete magnitude is therefore
the one-outside-the-other of
the many ones as of a same;
not the many ones in general,
but posited rather as the many of a unity.

C. THE LIMITING OF QUANTITY

Discrete magnitude has,
first, the one for its principle
and, second, is a plurality of ones;
third, it is essentially continuous,
it is the one as at the same time
sublated, as unity,
the self-continuing as such
in the discreteness of the ones.
Consequently, it is posited as one magnitude,
and the “one” is its determinateness;
a “one” which, in this posited and determinate existence,
excludes, is a limit to the unity.
Discrete magnitude as such is not supposed
to be immediately limited,
but, when distinguished from continuous magnitude,
it is an existence and a something,
the determinateness of which,
and in it also the first negation and limit,
is the “one.”

This limit, besides referring to the unity
and being the moment of negation in it,
is also, as one, self-referred;
thus it is enclosing, encompassing limit.
The limit here is not at first distinct
from the something of its existence,
but, as one, is essentially this negative point itself.
But the being which is here limited is essentially as continuity,
and in virtue of this continuity it transcends the limit,
transcends this one, and is indifferent to it.
Real, discrete quantity is thus one quantity, or quantum:
quantity as an existence and a something.

Since the one which is a limit encompasses
within it the many ones of discrete quantity,
it posits them equally as sublated in it;
it is a limit to continuity simply as such
and, consequently, the distinction between
continuous and discrete magnitude is here indifferent;
or, more precisely, it is a limit to
the continuity of the one
just as much as of the other;
in this, both pass over into being quanta.
