
c. Affirmative infinity

In this reciprocal determination of the finite and the infinite
alternating back and forth as just indicated,
the truth of these two is already implicitly present in itself,
and all that is needed is to take up what is there.
This back and forth movement constitutes the external realization
of the concept in which the content of the latter is posited,
but externally, as a falling out of the two;
all that is needed is the comparing of these two different moments
in which the unity is given which the concept itself gives.
“Unity of the finite and the infinite”
(as has often been already noted
but must especially be kept in mind at this juncture)
is the uneven expression for the unity as it is in truth;
but also the removal of this uneven determination must be
found in the externalization of the concept that lies ahead of us.

Taken in their first, only immediate determination,
the infinite is the transcending of the finite;
according to its determination, it is the negation of the finite;
the finite, for its part, is only that which must be transcended,
the negation in it of itself, and this is the infinite.
In each, therefore, there is the determinateness of the other,
whereas, according to the viewpoint of the infinite progression,
the two should be mutually excluded
and would have to follow one another only alternately;
neither can be posited and grasped without the other,
the infinite without the finite, the finite without the infinite.
In saying what the infinite is, namely the negation of the finite,
the finite itself is said also;
it cannot be avoided in the determination of the infinite.
One need only know what is being said in order to
find the determination of the finite in the infinite.
Regarding the finite, it is readily conceded that it is the null;
this very nothingness is however the infinite
from which it is inseparable.
Understood in this way, they may seem to be taken
according to the way each refers to its other.
Taken without this connecting reference,
and thus joined only through an “and,”
they subsist independently,
each only an existent over against the other.
We have to examine how they would be constituted in this way.
The infinite, thus positioned, is one of the two;
but, as only one of them, it is itself finite,
it is not the whole but only one side;
it has its limit in that which stands over against it;
and so it is the finite infinite.
We have before us only two finites.
The finitude of the infinite,
and therefore its unity with the finite,
lies in the very fact that it is separated from the finite
and placed, consequently, on one side.
The finite, for its part, removed from the infinite
and positioned for itself, is this self-reference
in which the relativity, its dependence and transitoriness, are removed;
it is the same self-subsistence and self-affirmation
which the infinite is presumed to be.

The two pathways of consideration,
even though they seem at first to have
each a different determinateness for their point of departure;
the former inasmuch as it assumes it to be
only the reference of infinite and finite
to each other, of each to the other;
and the latter their complete separation from each other
yield one and the same result.
The infinite and the finite, taken together
as referring to each other in a connection
which is presumed external but is in fact essential to them
(for without it, neither is what it is),
each contains its other in its own determination,
just as, when each is taken for itself,
when looked at on its terms,
each has the other present in it
as its own moment.

This yields, then, the scandalous unity
of the finite and the infinite,
the unity which is itself the infinite
that embraces both itself and the finite,
the infinite, therefore, understood in a sense
other than when the finite is separated from it
and placed on the other side from it.
Since they must now also be distinguished,
each is within it, as just shown,
itself the unity of both;
there are thus two such unities.
The common element, the unity of both determinacies,
as such a unity, posits them at first as negated,
for each is to be what it is in being distinguished;
in their unity, therefore, they lose their qualitative nature;
an important reflection for countering the incorrigible habit
of representing the infinite and the finite, in their unity,
as still holding on to the quality that
they would have when taken apart from each other;
of seeing in that unity, therefore, nothing except contradiction,
and not also the resolution of the contradiction by
the negation of the qualitative determinateness of each.
And so is the unity of the infinite and the finite,
at first simple and universal, falsified.

But further, since the two are now to be taken
also as distinguished, the unity of the infinite
which is itself both of these moments
is determined differently in each.
The infinite, determined as such, has in it
the finitude which is distinct from it;
in this unity, the infinite is the in-itself
while the finite is only determinateness,
the limit in the infinite.
But such a limit is the absolute
other of the infinite, its opposite.
The infinite's determination, which is the in-itself as such,
is corrupted by being saddled with a quality of this sort;
the infinite is thus a finitized infinite.
Likewise, since the finite is as such only the non-in-itself
but equally has its opposite in it by virtue
of the said unity,
it is elevated above its worth
and, so to speak, infinitely elevated;
it is posited as the infinitized finite.

Likewise, just as the simple unity of infinite and finite was
falsified before by the understanding, so too is the double unity.
Here also this happens because the infinite is taken
in one of the two unities not as negated but,
rather, as the in-itself in which, therefore,
determinateness and restriction should not be posited,
for they would debase and corrupt it.
Conversely, the finite is equally held fixed
as not negated, although null in itself;
so that, in combination with the infinite,
it is elevated to what it is not
and is thereby infinitized notwithstanding its determination
that has not vanished but is rather perpetuated.

The falsification that the understanding perpetrates
with respect to the finite and the infinite,
of holding their reciprocal reference fixed
as qualitative differentiation,
of maintaining that their determination is separate,
indeed, absolutely separate, comes from forgetting
what for the understanding itself is the concept of these moments.
According to this concept, the unity of the finite and the infinite
is not an external bringing together of them,
nor an incongruous combination that goes against their nature,
one in which inherently separate and opposed terms
that exist independently and are consequently incompatible,
would be knotted together.
Rather, each is itself this unity,
and this only as a sublating of itself
in which neither would have an advantage
over the other in in-itselfness and affirmative existence.
As has earlier been shown, finitude is only as a transcending of itself;
it is therefore within it that the infinite,
the other of itself, is contained.
Similarly, the infinite is only as the transcending of the finite;
it therefore contains its other essentially,
and it is thus within it that it is the other of itself.
The finite is not sublated by the infinite
as by a power present outside it;
its infinity consists rather in sublating itself.

This sublating is not, consequently,
alteration or otherness in general,
not the sublating of something.
That into which the finite is sublated is
the infinite as the negating of finitude.
But the latter has long since been only existence,
determined as a non-being.
It is only the negation, therefore,
that in the negation sublates itself.
Thus infinity is determined on its side
as the negative of the finite
and thereby of determinateness in general,
as an empty beyond;
its sublating of itself into the finite is
a return from an empty flight,
the negation of the beyond
which is inherently a negative.

Present in both, therefore, is the same negation of negation.
But this negation of negation is in itself self-reference,
affirmation but as turning back to itself, that is
through the mediation that the negation of negation is.
These are the determinations that it is essential to bring to view;
the second point, however, is that in the infinite progression
they are also posited, and how they are posited therein,
namely, not in their ultimate truth.

First, both are negated in that progression,
the infinite as well as the finite;
both are equally transcended.
Second, they are also posited as distinct,
one after the other, each positive for itself.
We sort out these two determinations
while comparing them, just as in the comparison (in an external comparing)
we have separated the two ways of considering them:
the finite and the infinite as referring to one another,
and each taken for itself.
The infinite progression, however, says more than this.
Also posited in it, though at first still only
as transition and alternation,
is the connectedness of the terms being distinguished.
We now only need to see, in one simple reflection,
what is in fact present in it.

In the first place,
the negation of the finite and the infinite
which is posited in the infinite progression
can be taken as simple,
and hence as mutual externality,
only a following of one upon the other.
Starting from the finite,
the limit is thus transcended, the finite negated.
We now have its beyond, the infinite,
but in this the limit rises up again;
so we have the transcending of the infinite.
This twofold sublation is nonetheless
partly only an external event
and an alternating of moments in general,
and partly still not posited as one unity;
each of these moves beyond is an independent starting point,
a fresh act, so that the two fall apart.
But, in addition, their connection is
also present in the infinite progression.
The finite comes first;
then there is the transcending of it,
and this negative, or this beyond of the finite,
is the infinite;
third, this negation is transcended in turn,
a new limit comes up, a finite again.
This is the complete, self-closing movement
that has arrived at that which made the beginning;
what emerges is the same as that
from which the departure was made,
that is, the finite is restored;
the latter has therefore rejoined itself,
in its beyond has only found itself again.

The same is the case regarding the infinite.
In the infinite, in the beyond of the limit,
only a new limit arises which has the same fate, namely,
that as finite it must be negated.
Thus what is again at hand is the same infinite
that just now disappeared in the new limit;
by being sublated, by traversing the new limit,
the infinite has not therefore advanced one jot further:
it has distanced itself neither from the finite
(for the finite is just this,
to pass over into the infinite),
nor from itself, for it has arrived at itself.

Thus the finite and the infinite are both
this movement of each returning
to itself through its negation;
they are only as implicit mediation,
and the affirmative of each
contains the negative of each,
and is the negation of the negation.
They are thus a result
and, as such, not in the determination
that they had at the beginning:
neither is the finite an existence on its side
nor the infinite an existence
or a being-in-itself beyond that existence,
that is, beyond existence in
the determination of finitude.
The understanding strongly resists
the unity of the finite and the infinite
only because it presupposes restriction
and finitude to remain,
like being-in-itself, constants.
It thereby overlooks the negation of both
which is in fact present in the infinite progression,
just as it equally overlooks that the two occur in this
progression only as moments of a whole,
that each emerges only through the mediation of its opposite
but, essentially, equally by means of the sublation of its opposite.

If this immanent turning back has for the moment been reckoned
to be just as much the turning back of the finite to itself
and of the infinite to itself,
noticeable in this very result is an error connected
with the one-sidedness just criticized:
the finite and then the infinite is
each taken as the starting point,
and only in this way two results ensue.
But it is a matter of total indifference
which is taken as the starting point
and, with this, the distinction caused
by the duality of results dissolves of itself.
This is likewise posited in the line
of the infinite progression,
open-ended on both sides,
wherein each of the moments
recurs in equal alternation,
and it is totally extraneous
at which position the progression is
arrested and taken as beginning.
The moments are distinguished in the progression
but each is equally only moment of the other.
Since both, the finite and the infinite,
are themselves moments of the progress,
they are jointly the finite,
and, since they are equally jointly
negated in it and in the result,
this result as the negation
of their joint finitude is
called with truth the infinite.
Their distinction is thus the
double meaning which they both have.
The finite has the double meaning,
first, of being the finite over against the infinite
which stands over against it,
and, second, of being at the same time
the finite and the infinite over against the infinite.
Also the infinite has the double meaning
of being one of the two moments
(it is then the bad infinite)
and of being the infinite in which the two moments,
itself and its other, are only moments.
Therefore, as in fact we now have it,
the nature of the infinite is
that it is the process in which it lowers itself
to be only one of its determinations over against the finite
and therefore itself only one of the finites,
and elevates this distinction of itself
and itself to be self-affirmation
and, through this mediation, the true infinite.

This determination of the true infinite
cannot be captured in the already criticized formula
of a unity of the finite and the infinite;
unity is abstract, motionless self-sameness,
and the moments are likewise unmoved beings.
But, like both its moments, the infinite is
rather essentially only as becoming,
though a becoming now further determined in its moments.
Becoming has for its determinations,
first, abstract being and nothing;
as alteration, it has existence, something and other;
now as infinite, it has finite and infinite,
these two themselves as in becoming.

This infinite, as being-turned-back-unto-itself,
as reference of itself to itself, is being;
but not indeterminate, abstract being,
for it is posited as negating the negation;
consequently, it is also existence or “thereness,”
for it contains negation in general
and consequently determinateness.
It is, and is there, present, before us.
Only the bad infinite is the beyond,
since it is only the negation of
the finite posited as real
and, as such, it is abstract first negation;
thus determined only as negative,
it does not have the affirmation of existence in it;
held fast only as something negative,
it ought not to be there, it ought to be unattainable.
However, to be thus unattainable is
not its grandeur but rather its defect,
which is at bottom the result of holding fast
to the finite as such, as existent.
It is the untrue which is the unattainable,
and what must be recognized is that
such an infinite is the untrue.
The image of the progression in infinity is the straight line;
the infinite is only at the two limits of this line,
and always only is where the latter
(which is existence)
is not but transcends itself,
in its non-existence, that is, in the indeterminate.
As true infinite, bent back upon itself,
its image becomes the circle,
the line that has reached itself,
closed and wholly present,
without beginning and end.

True infinity, thus taken in general as existence posited
as affirmative in contrast to abstract negation,
is reality in a higher sense than it was earlier
as simply determined; it has now obtained a concrete content.
It is not the finite which is the real, but rather the infinite.
Thus reality is further determined
as essence, concept, idea, and so forth.
In connection with the more concrete,
it is however superfluous to repeat such earlier
and more abstract categories as reality,
and to use them for determinations more
concrete than they are by themselves.
Such a repetition, as when it is said that essence,
or that the concept, is real, has its origin in the fact
that to uneducated thought the most abstract categories
such as being, existence, reality, finitude, are the most familiar.

The more immediate occasion, however,
for recalling here the categories of reality
is that the negation, against which reality is the affirmative,
is here the negation of negation,
and consequently itself posited over against
that reality which finite existence is.
Negation is thus determined as ideality;
the idealized is the finite as it is in the true infinite
(as a determination, a content, a distinct but
not a subsistent existent, a moment rather.
Ideality has this more concrete signification
which is not fully expressed through
the negation of finite existence.)
As regards reality and ideality,
the opposition of finite and infinite is, however,
so grasped that the finite assumes the value of “the real,”
whereas the infinite that of “the idealized”;
in the same way, further on, also the concept is
regarded as an idealization, that is, as a mere idealization,
in contrast to existence in general, which is regarded as “the real.”
When contrasted in this way, it is of course of no use to have
reserved for the said concrete determination of negation
the distinctive expression of “idealization”;
in that opposition of finite and infinite,
we are back to the one-sidedness of
the abstract negative characteristic of the bad infinite
and still fixed in the affirmative existence of the finite.
