
CHAPTER 2

Appearance

Concrete existence is the immediacy of being
to which essence has again restored itself.
In itself this immediacy is the reflection of essence into itself.
As concrete existence, essence has stepped out of its ground
which has itself passed over into it.
Concrete existence is this reflected immediacy
in so far as, within, it is absolute negativity.
It is now also posited as such,
in that it has determined itself as appearance.

At first, therefore, appearance is
essence in its concrete existence;
essence is immediately present in it.
That it is not immediate,
but rather reflected concrete existence,
constitutes the moment of essence in it;
or concrete existence,
as essential concrete existence,
is appearance.

Something is only appearance,
in the sense that concrete existence is
as such only a posited being,
not something that is in-and-for-itself.
This is what constitutes its essentiality,
to have the negativity of reflection,
the nature of essence, within it.
There is no question here of an alien,
external reflection to which essence would belong
and which, by comparing this essence with concrete existence,
would declare the latter to be appearance.
On the contrary, as we have seen,
this essentiality of concrete existence,
that it is appearance, is
concrete existence's own truth.
The reflection by virtue of which
it is this is its own.

But if it is said that something is only appearance,
meaning that as contrasted with it
immediate concrete existence is the truth,
then the fact is that appearance is the higher truth,
for it is concrete existence as essential,
whereas concrete existence is appearance
that is still void of essence
because it only contains in it
the one moment of appearance,
namely that of concrete existence
as immediate, not yet negative, reflection.
When appearance is said to be essenceless,
one thinks of the moment of its negativity as if,
by contrast with it, the immediate were
the positive and the true;
in fact, however, this immediate does not
yet contain essential truth in it.
Concrete existence rather ceases to be essenceless
by passing over into appearance.

Essence reflectively shines at first
just within, in its simple identity;
as such, it is abstract reflection,
the pure movement of nothing
through nothing back to itself.
Essence appears, and so it now is real shine,
since the moments of the shine have concrete existence.
Appearance, as we have seen, is the thing as
the negative mediation of itself with itself;
the differences which it contains
are self-subsisting matters
which are the contradiction of
being an immediate subsistence,
yet of obtaining their subsistence
only in an alien self-subsistence,
hence in the negation of their own,
but then again, just because of that,
also in the negation of that alien self-subsistence
or in the negation of their own negation.
Reflective shine is this same mediation,
but its fleeting moments obtain in appearance
the shape of immediate self-subsistence.
On the other hand, the immediate self-subsistence
which pertains to concrete existence is reduced to a moment.
Appearance is therefore the unity of
reflective shine and concrete existence.

Appearance now determines itself further.
It is concrete existence as essential;
as essential, concrete existence
differs from the concrete existence
which is unessential,
and these two sides
refer to each other.

Appearance is, therefore,
first, simple self-identity
which also contains
diverse content determinations
and, both as identity
and as the connecting reference
of these determinations,
is that which remains self-equal
in the flux of appearance;
this is the law of appearance.

But, second, the law which is
simple in its diversity
passes over into opposition;
the essential moment of appearance becomes
opposed to appearance itself
and, confronting the world of appearance,
the world that exists in itself
comes onto the scene.

Third, this opposition returns into its ground;
that which is in itself is in the appearance
and, conversely, that which appears is determined
as taken up into its being-in-itself.
Appearance becomes relation.
