
A. THE SYLLOGISM OF EXISTENCE

1. The syllogism in its immediate form
has for its moments the determinations
of the concept as immediate.
Accordingly, these are the abstract determinacies of form,
such as have not yet been developed by mediation into concretion
but are only singular determinacies.
The first syllogism is thus the one which is strictly formal.
The formalism of syllogistic inference consists in
stopping short at the form of this first syllogism.
The concept, when partitioned into its abstract moments,
has singularity and universality for its extremes,
and itself appears as the particularity
that stands between them.
Because of their immediacy,
these determinacies only refer to themselves,
one and all a single content.
Particularity constitutes at first the middle term
by uniting within itself, immediately,
the two moments of singularity and universality.
Because of its determinateness,
on the one hand it is subsumed under the universal;
on the other hand, the singular
with respect to which it possesses universality
is subsumed under it.
This concretion is at first, however,
only a double-sidedness;
the middle term, because of the immediacy
that affects it in the immediate syllogism,
is a simple determinateness,
and the mediation which it constitutes is not as yet posited.
Now the dialectical movement of the syllogism of existence
consists in positing the moments of the mediation
that alone constitutes the syllogism.

a. First figure of the syllogism

S-P-U is the general schema of the determinate syllogism.
Singularity connects with universality through particularity;
the singular is not universal immediately
but by means of particularity;
and conversely, universality is likewise not singular immediately
but lowers itself to it through particularity.
These determinations stand over against each other as extremes
and are one in a third term which is diverse from them.
The two are both determinateness;
in this they are identical;
this, their universal determinateness, is particularity.
But they are no less extremes with respect to
this particularity than they are to each other,
for each is in its immediate determinateness.

The general meaning of this syllogism is that the singular,
which as such is infinite self-reference
and consequently would be only an inwardness,
emerges through the medium of particularity into existence,
into a universality wherein it no longer belongs just to itself
but stands in external conjunction;
conversely, since in its determinateness
the singular sets itself apart as particularity,
in this separation it is a concreted term
and, because of the self-reference of the determinateness,
it is a self-referring universal,
and consequently also a true singular;
in the extreme of universality the
singular has gone from externality into itself.
The objective significance of the syllogism is
in this first figure only superficially present at first,
for the determinations are not as yet posited in it
as the unity which constitutes the essence
of the syllogistic inference.
The syllogism is still something subjective
inasmuch as the abstract meaning which its terms have
has no being in and for itself
but is rather only in a subjective consciousness,
and is thus isolated.
Moreover, as we have seen, the relation of
singularity, particularity, and universality
is the necessary and essential form-relation of
the determinations of the syllogism;
the deficiency does not rest in the
determinateness of the form
but in that each single determination is not
at the same time richer under it.
Aristotle confined himself rather to the mere relation of
inherence by defining the nature of the syllogism as follows:
When three terms are so related to each other
that the one extreme is in the entire middle term,
and this middle term is in the entire other extreme,
then these two extremes are necessarily united in the conclusion.
What is here expressed is the repetition of
the equal relation of inherence
of the one extreme to the middle term,
and then again of this last to the other extreme,
rather than the determinateness of the three terms
to each other.
Now since the syllogistic inference rests
on this determinateness of the terms to each other,
it is immediately apparent that the other relations of terms
as are given by the other figures can have validity
as inferences of the understanding
only to the extent that they let themselves
be reduced to that original relation;
these other are not diverse species of figures
that stand alongside the first
but, on the one hand, to the extent that they are assumed
to be correct inferences,
they rest on the form of syllogistic inference in general;
and, on the other hand, to the extent that they deviate from it,
they are variant forms into which
the first abstract form necessarily passes over
and thereby further determines itself and becomes totality.
How this occurs, we must now see in greater detail.

S-P-U is thus the general schema of
the syllogism in its determinateness.
The singular is subsumed under the particular
and the particular under the universal;
therefore, the singular is also subsumed under the universal.
Or the particular inheres in the singular
and the universal in the particular;
therefore, the universal also inheres in the singular.
With respect to the side of the universal,
the particular is the subject;
with respect to that of the singular, it is predicate;
or as against the one it is singular,
as against the other it is universal.
Since both these determinations are united in it,
by virtue of this unity of determinations
the extremes are joined together.
The “therefore” appears as an inference
that has taken place in the subject
and derives from the subjective insight
into the relation of the two immediate premises.
Since subjective reflection expresses
the two connections of the middle
to the extremes as particular
and indeed immediate judgments or propositions,
the conclusion as the mediated connection is
of course also a particular proposition,
and the “hence” or the “therefore,” is
the expression that it is the one which is mediated.
But this “therefore” is not to be regarded
as a determination which is external to this proposition,
one that would have its ground and seat in subjective reflection,
but as grounded rather in the nature of the extremes themselves
whose connection is again enunciated as
a mere judgment or proposition only for the sake of,
and by virtue of, abstractive reflection,
but whose true connection is posited as the middle term.
“Therefore S is A”:
that this is a judgment is a merely subjective circumstance;
that it is not a merely subjective judgment,
that is, not a connection drawn through
the mere copula or the empty “is”
but one drawn rather through a determinate middle
which is replete with content,
that is precisely the meaning of the syllogistic inference.
For this reason, to regard the syllogism as
merely consisting of three judgments is
a formalistic view that ignores
the relation of the determinations
which alone is at issue in the inference.
It is altogether a merely subjective reflection
that splits the connection of
the terms into isolated premises
and a conclusion distinct from them:

All humans are mortal,
Gaius is a human
Therefore Gaius is mortal.

One is immediately seized by boredom the moment
one hears this inference being trotted out,
a boredom brought on by the futility of a form
that by means of separate propositions
gives the illusion of a diversity
which is immediately dissolved in the fact itself.
It is mostly because of this subjective attire
that the inference appears as a subjective expedient
in which reason or understanding take refuge
when they are incapable of immediate cognition.
The nature of things, the rational,
certainly does not operate in this way,
first by drawing up a major premise for itself,
the connection of some particularity to a subsistent universal;
then by discovering in a second moment the separate connection
of a singularity to the particularity,
out of which in a third and final moment
a new proportion comes to light.
This syllogistic inference from
one separate proposition to another is
nothing but a subjective form;
the nature of the fact is that
its various determinations are
united in a unity of essence.
This rationality is not an expedient;
on the contrary, in contrast to the
immediacy of the connection
that still obtains in judgment,
it is the objective element;
it is the prior immediacy of cognition
that rather is mere subjectivity,
in contrast to the syllogistic inference
which is the truth of the judgment.
All things are a syllogism,
a universal united through particularity with singularity;
surely not a whole made up of three propositions.

2. In the immediate syllogism of the understanding,
the terms have the form of immediate determinations;
we must now consider that syllogism from this side,
according to which the terms are content.
We may then regard it as qualitative,
just as we did the judgment of existence
which has the same side of qualitative determination.
The terms of this syllogism,
just like the terms of that judgment,
are accordingly singular determinacies,
for the determinateness is posited
because of its self-reference as indifferent to form
and hence as content.
The singular is some immediate concrete subject matter or other;
particularity, one of its determinacies, properties or relations;
universality, a yet more abstract, more singularized
determinateness in the particular.
Since the subject, as something immediately determined,
is as yet not posited in its concept,
its concretion is not reduced to its essential determinacies;
its self-referring determinateness is therefore
indeterminate, an infinite manifoldness.
In this immediacy, the singular
has an infinite multitude of determinacies
that belong to its particularity
and any may serve in a syllogism as the middle term for it.
Through each middle term, however,
the singular attaches to another universal;
through each of its properties it enters into
a different arrangement and context of existence.
Moreover, in comparison with the universal,
the middle term is also a concreted term;
it itself contains several predicates,
and through the same middle term
the singular can again attach to several universals.
In general, therefore, it is entirely accidental and arbitrary
which of the many properties of a thing is taken
for the purpose of connecting it with a predicate;
other middle terms are transitions to other predicates,
and even the same middle term may by itself be
the transition to different predicates,
for as a particular against the universal
it contains several determinations.
But not only is an indeterminate number of
syllogisms equally possible for a subject
and not only is any single syllogism
contingent as regards content,
but these syllogisms that concern the same subject
must also run into contradiction.
For difference as such,
which is at first an indifferent diversity,
is in essence equally opposition.
The concrete is no longer merely phenomenal
but is concrete through the unity in the concept of opposites
that have determined themselves as moments of the latter.
Now inasmuch as in the formal syllogism,
in keeping with the qualitative nature of the terms,
the concrete is taken according to
one of the single determinations that pertain to it,
the syllogistic inference assigns to it the predicate
corresponding to this middle term;
but inasmuch as from another side the
opposite determinateness is inferred,
the previous conclusion turns out to be false,
even though its premises and equally so its consequences
are by themselves quite correct.
If from the middle term that a wall was painted blue
it is concluded that it is blue,
this is a correct inference.
But, this conclusion notwithstanding,
the wall can be green if it was
also covered over with a yellow color,
a circumstance from which alone it would follow that the wall is yellow.
If from the senses as middle term it is concluded that
the human being is neither good nor bad,
for neither the one nor the other can be predicated of the senses,
the inference is correct;
yet the conclusion is wrong,
because to the human being, taken concretely,
spirituality also applies as the middle term.
From the middle term of the gravitation of the planets,
the satellites and comets towards the sun,
it follows correctly that these bodies fall into the sun;
but they do not fall into it,
because they are equally their own center of gravity
or, as it is said, are driven by the centrifugal force.
Likewise, from sociability as the middle term,
the community of goods among citizens can be inferred;
however, from individuality as the middle term,
if the term is pressed with equal abstractness,
there follows the dissolution of the state,
as for example it did follow for the German Empire
from adhering to that middle term.
It is only fair to hold that nothing is
as unsatisfactory as such a formal syllogism,
since which middle term is employed is
a matter of chance or arbitrariness.
No matter how elegantly a deduction is
run through inferences of this kind,
however fully its correctness is to be conceded,
all this still amounts to nothing,
for the possibility is still there
that other middle terms may be found
from which the opposite can be deduced with equal correctness.
Kant's antinomies of reason amount to nothing more than that
from a concept one of its determinations is
laid down as ground at one time,
and another determination at another time,
both with equal necessity.
The insufficiency and contingency of an inference
must not be blamed in these cases on the content,
as if they were independent of the form
and the latter alone were the concern of logic.
On the contrary, it lies in the form of the formal syllogism
that the content is such a one-sided quality;
the content is destined to this one-sidedness
because of the form's abstractness.
It is, namely, one single quality of the many qualities
or determinations of a concrete subject matter,
or of a concept, because according to the form it
is not supposed to be anything more than just
such an immediate, single determinateness.
The extreme of singularity is, as abstract singularity,
the immediate concrete, consequently
an infinite or indeterminate manifold;
the middle term is the equally abstract particularity,
consequently a single one of these manifold qualities,
and likewise the other extreme is the abstract universal.
It is therefore because of its form that the formal syllogism is
totally contingent as regards its content,
not indeed because to the syllogism it is accidental
whether this or that subject matter is subject to it
(logic abstracts from content),
but because, in so far as a subject is laid at its basis,
it is contingent which content determinations it will infer from it.

3. The determinations of the syllogism are
determinations of content inasmuch as
they are immediate and abstract determinations
reflected into themselves.
But their essence is to be, not immanently reflected and
mutually indifferent determinations,
but determinations of form,
and to this extent they are essentially connections.
These connections are,
first, those of the extremes to the middle term.
These are immediate connections,
the propositiones premise namely,
the connection of the particular to the universal,
the propositio major,
and that of the singular to the particular,
the propositio minor.
Second, there is the connection of the extremes to one
another, and this is the mediated connection, the conclusion.
The immediate connections, the premises, are
propositions or judgments in general,
and they contradict the nature of the syllogism,
for according to the latter the
different concept determinations should not be immediately connected
but also their unity should be posited;
the truth of the judgment is the syllogistic conclusion.
And there is all the more reason why the premises
cannot remain immediate connections as their content is made up of
immediately differentiated determinations
which, as such, are not in and for themselves identical,
unless the premises are identical propositions,
that is, empty tautologies that lead to nothing.

Accordingly, the normal expectation is
that the premises will be proved,
that is, that they ought likewise
to be exhibited as conclusions.
The two premises, therefore, yield two further syllogisms.
But these two new syllogisms together yield
four premises that require four new syllogisms;
these have eight premises whose eight conclusions yield
in turn sixteen conclusions for their sixteen premises,
and so on in a geometrical progression to infinity.

Thus we have again the progress to infinity
that occurred in the lower sphere of being
but we would not expect now
in the domain of the concept,
the domain of the absolute reflection
from the finite to the self,
the region of free infinity and truth.
It was shown in the sphere of being that
whenever the bad infinity that runs away
into a progression raises its head,
what we have is the contradiction of a qualitative being
and of an impotent ought that would transcend it;
the progression itself is the repeated demand that
there be unity that intervenes to confront the qualitative,
and the constant fall back into the limitation
which is inadequate to the demand.
Now in the formal syllogism the immediate connection
or the qualitative judgment is the basis,
and the mediation of the syllogism is
the higher truth posited over against it.
The infinite progression of the proof of the premises does
not resolve this contradiction
but only perpetually renews it
and is the repetition of one and the same original deficiency.
The truth of the infinite progression is
rather the sublation of it and of the form
which the progression itself has already determined as deficient.
This form is that of the mediation S-P-U.
The two connections, S-P and P-U are supposed to be mediated;
if this is done in the same manner,
only the deficient form S-P-U is replicated,
and so on to infinity.
With respect to S, P also has the
form determination of a universal;
and with respect to U that of a singular,
for these connections are as such judgments.
As such, they are in need of mediation;
but in that form of mediation,
only the relation that was supposed
to be sublated comes up again.

The mediation must therefore occur in some other way.
For the mediation of P-U, there is S available;
hence the mediation must be given the shape of P-S-U.
To mediate S-P, there is U available;
accordingly, this mediation becomes S-U-P.

If this transition is examined more closely in light of its concept,
then, as was shown earlier, the mediation of the formal syllogism is
in the first instance contingent according to content.
The immediate singular has in its determinacies
an indeterminate number of middle terms,
and these have in general equally as many determinacies in turn;
it is, therefore, entirely a matter of external arbitrary choice,
or in general of an external circumstance and accidental determination,
as to which universal the subject of the syllogism should be annexed.
As regards its content, therefore, the mediation is
not anything necessary, nor universal;
it is not grounded in the concept of the fact
but the basis of the inference is something external to it,
that is, the immediate;
but of the determinations of the concept,
it is the singular which is the immediate.

With respect to form, the mediation likewise
presupposes the immediacy of connection;
the mediation itself is thus mediated,
mediated indeed by means of the immediate,
that is, the singular.
More precisely, the singular has become a mediating term
through the conclusion of the first syllogism.
That conclusion is S-U;
the singular is thereby posited as a universal.
In one premise, that is, the minor S-P,
it is already as a particular;
consequently, the singular is that
in which these two determinations are united.
Or the conclusion expresses in and for itself
the singular as a universal,
and it does it, not in any immediate manner, but mediatedly,
hence as a necessary connection.
The simple particularity was the middle term;
in the conclusion, this particularity is posited
as developed as the connection of singular and universality.
But the universal is still a qualitative determinateness,
the predicate of the singular;
in being determined as universal,
the singular is posited as the universality of the extremes
or as the middle;
it is for itself the extreme of singularity,
but since it is now determined as a universal,
it is at the same time the unity of the two extremes.

b. The second figure: P-S-U

1. The truth of the first qualitative syllogism is
that something is not in and for itself united
to a qualitative determinateness which is a universal,
but is united to it by means of a contingency
or in a singularity.
The subject of the syllogism has not returned
in such a quality to its concept
but is conceived only in its externality;
the immediacy constitutes the basis of
the connection and hence the mediation;
to this extent, the singular is in truth the middle.

But further, the syllogistic connection is
the sublation of the immediacy;
the conclusion is a connection drawn not immediately
but through a third term;
therefore, it contains a negative unity;
therefore, the mediation is now determined
as containing a negative moment within it.
In this second syllogism, the premises are: P-S and S-U;
only the firstof these premises is still an immediate one;
the second, S-U, is already mediated,
namely through the first syllogism;
the second syllogism thus presupposes the first just as, conversely,
the first presupposes the second.
The two extremes are here determined,
the one as against the other, as particular and universal.
The latter thus retains its place; it is predicate.
But the particular has exchanged places;
it is subject or is posited in the
determination of the extreme of singularity,
just as the singular is posited with
the determination of the middle term or of particularity.
The two no longer are, therefore, the abstract immediacies
which they were in the first syllogism.
However, they are not yet posited as concrete somethings;
in standing in the place of the other, each is thereby posited;
in its own determination and at the same time,
although only externally, into that of the other.

The determinate and objective meaning of this syllogism is
that the universal is not in and for itself a determinate particular
(it is rather the totality of its particulars)
but that it is one of its species
through the mediation of singularity;
the rest of its species are excluded from
it by the immediacy of externality.
Likewise the particular is not for its part immediately,
and in and for itself, the universal;
the negative unity is rather what removes
the determinateness from it
and thereby raises it to universality.
The singularity thus relates to the particular negatively
in so far as it is supposed to be its predicate;
it is not the predicate of the particular.

2. But the terms are at first
still immediate determinacies;
they have not advanced of their own
to any objective signification;
the positions which two of them
have exchanged and now occupy is the form,
and this is as yet only external to them.
Therefore they are still, as in the first syllogism,
each a content indifferent as such to the other,
two qualities linked together, not in and for themselves,
but through the mediation of an accidental singularity.

The syllogism of the first figure was the immediate syllogism,
or again, the syllogism in so far as its concept is
an abstract form that has not yet realized itself
in all its determinations.
The transition of this pure form into another figure is
on the one hand the beginning of the realization of the concept,
in that the negative moment of the mediation,
and thereby one further determinateness of the form,
is posited in the originally immediate,
qualitative determinateness of the terms.
But, on the other hand, this is at the same time
an alteration of the pure form of the syllogism;
the latter no longer conforms to it fully,
and the determinateness posited in its terms is
at variance with that original form determination.
In so far as it is regarded as only a subjective syllogism
that runs its course in external reflection,
we can then take it as a species of syllogistic inference
that should conform to the genus,
namely the general schema S-P-U.
But it does not at the moment conform to it;
its two premises are P-S or S-P and S-U;
the middle term is in both cases the one which is subsumed
or is the subject in which the two other terms thus inhere,
is not therefore a middle term
that in one case would subsume or be predicate,
and in the other would be subsumed or be subject,
or a middle in which one of the terms
would inhere but would itself inhere in the other.
The true meaning of this syllogism's lack of conformity to
the general form of the syllogism is that
the latter has passed over into it,
for its truth consists in being
a subjective, contingent conjoining of terms.
If the conclusion in this second figure is correct
(that is, without recurring to the restriction,
to which we shall presently turn,
that makes of it something indeterminate),
then it is correct because it is so on its own,
not because it is the conclusion of this syllogism.
But the same is the case for the conclusion of the first figure;
it is this, the truth of that first figure,
which is posited by the second.
On the view that the second figure is only one species,
we overlook the necessary transition of
the first figure into this second
and stop short at the first as the true form.
Hence, if in the second figure
(which from ancient custom is referred to,
without further ground, as the third)
we are equally supposed to find
a correct syllogism in this subjective sense,
this syllogism would have to be commensurate with the first;
consequently, since the one premise S-U has the relation of
the subsumption of the middle term under one extreme,
then it would have to be possible for the other premise S-P
to receive the opposite relation to that which it has,
and for P to be subsumed under S.
But such a relation would be the sublation of
the determinate judgment S is P,
and could only occur in an indeterminate judgment, a particular judgment;
consequently, the conclusion in this figure can only be particular.
But the particular judgment, as we remarked above,
is positive as well as negative,
a conclusion, therefore, to which no great value can be ascribed.
Since the particular and universal are also the extremes,
and are immediate determinacies indifferent to each other,
their relation itself is indifferent;
each can be the major or the minor term,
indifferently the one or the other,
and consequently either premise can also
be taken as major or minor.

3. Since the conclusion is positive as well as negative,
it is a connection which for that reason is
indifferent to these determinacies,
hence a universal connection.
More precisely, the mediation of the first syllogism
was implicitly a contingent one;
in the second syllogism, this contingency is posited.
Consequently, the mediation is self-sublating;
it has the determination of singularity and immediacy;
what this syllogism joins together must,
on the contrary, be in itself and immediately identical,
for that mediating middle, the immediate singularity,
is an infinitely manifold and external determining.
Posited in it, therefore, is rather the self-external mediation.
The externality of singularity, however, is universality;
that mediation by means of the immediate singular
points beyond itself to the mediation which is the other than it,
one which therefore occurs by means of the universal.
In other words, what is supposed to be united by means of
the second syllogism, must be immediately conjoined;
the immediacy on which it is based
does not allow any definite conclusion.
The immediacy to which this syllogism points is
the opposite of its own:
it is the sublated first immediacy of being,
therefore the immediacy reflected into itself
or the abstract universal existing in itself.

From the standpoint of the present consideration,
the transition of this syllogism was like
the transition of being an alteration,
for its base is qualitative;
it is the immediacy of singularity.
But according to the concept,
singularity conjoins the particular and the universal
by sublating the determinateness of the particular
and this is what presents itself as the contingency
of this syllogistic inference.
The extremes are not conjoined by the specific connective
which they have in the middle term;
this term is not, therefore, their determinate unity,
and the positive unity that yet pertains to it is abstract universality.
But inasmuch as the middle term is posited in this determination
which is its truth, we have another form of the syllogism.

c. The third figure: S-U-P

1. This third syllogism no longer has any single immediate premise;
the connection S-U has been mediated by the first syllogism;
the connection P-U by the second.
It thus presupposes both these syllogisms;
but conversely it is presupposed by them,
just as in general each presupposes the other two.
In this third figure, therefore, it is the determination of the syllogism
as such that is brought to completion.
This reciprocal mediation means just this,
that each syllogism, although for itself a mediation,
does not possess the totality of mediation
but is affected by an immediacy
whose mediation lies outside it.

Considered in itself, the syllogism S-U-P is
the truth of the formal syllogism;
it expresses the fact that
its mediating middle is the abstract universal
and that the extremes are not contained in it
according to their essential determinateness
but only according to their universality,
that precisely that is not conjoined in it,
which was supposed to be mediated.
Posited here, therefore, is that
wherein the formalism of the syllogism consists;
that its terms have an immediate content
which is indifferent towards the form,
or, what amounts to the same,
that they are such form determinations
as have not yet reflected themselves
into determinations of content.

2. The middle of this syllogism is indeed the unity of the extremes,
but a unity in which abstraction is made from their determinateness,
the indeterminate universal.
But in so far as this universal is at the same time distinguished
from the extremes as the abstract from the determinate,
it is itself also a determinate as against them,
and the whole is a syllogism
whose relation to its concept needs examining.
As the universal, the middle term is
with respect to both its extremes
the term that subsumes or the predicate,
not a term for once also subsumed or the subject.
Now as a species of syllogism, it ought to conform to the latter,
and this can only happen on condition that,
inasmuch as the one connection S-U
already possesses the appropriate relation,
the other connection P-U contains it too.
This occurs in a judgment in which
the relation of subject and predicate is
an indifferent one, in a negative judgment.
Thus does the syllogism become legitimate,
but the conclusion is necessarily negative.

Consequently, also indifferent is now
which of the two determinations
of this proposition is taken as predicate or subject,
and whether the determination is taken in the syllogism as
the extreme of singularity or the extreme of particularity,
hence as the minor or major term.
Since on the usual assumption
which of the premises is supposed to be
the major or the minor depends on this distinction,
this too has now become a matter of indifference.
This is the ground of the customary
fourth figure of the syllogism
which was unknown to Aristotle
and has to do with an entirely void
and uninteresting distinction.
In it the immediate position of the terms is
the reverse of their position in the first figure;
since from the point of view of the formal treatment of judgment
the subject and predicate of the negative conclusion
do not have the determinate relation of subject and predicate,
but each can take the place of the other,
it is a matter of indifference which term is taken
as subject and which as predicate;
and just as indifferent is therefore
which premise is taken as the major
and which as the minor.
This indifference, to which the determination of particularity
also contributes
(especially if it is noted that this particularity
can be taken in a comprehensive sense),
makes of this fourth figure something totally idle.

3. The objective significance of the syllogism
in which the universal is the middle is that the mediating term,
as the unity of the extremes, is essentially a universal.
But since the universality is at first only qualitative or abstract,
the determinateness of the extremes is not contained in it;
their being conjoined in the conclusion,
if the conjunction is to take place,
must likewise have its ground in a mediation
that lies outside this syllogism
and is, with respect to the latter,
just as contingent as it is in
the preceding forms of the syllogism.
But now, since the universal is determined as the middle term,
and since the determinateness of the extremes
is not contained in this middle,
the latter is posited as one
which is wholly indifferent and external.
It is here, by virtue indeed of a bare abstraction,
that a fourth figure of the syllogism arose in the first place,
namely the figure of the relationless syllogism, U-U-U,
which abstracts from the qualitative differentiation of the terms
and therefore has their merely external unity,
their equality, for its determination.

d. The fourth figure: U-U-U, or the mathematical syllogism

1. The mathematical syllogism goes like this:
if two things or two determinations are equal to a third,
then they are equal to each other.
The relation of inherence or subsumption of terms is done away with.
A “third” is in general the mediating term;
but this third has absolutely no determination as against the extremes.
Each of the three terms can therefore be the mediating term
just as well as any other.
Which is needed for the job,
which of the three connections are
therefore to be taken as immediate,
and which as mediated,
depends on external circumstances and other conditions,
namely which two of the three are immediately given.
But this determination does not concern the syllogism
and is wholly external.

2. The mathematical syllogism ranks in mathematics as an axiom,
as a first self-explanatory proposition
which is neither capable nor in need of proof,
i.e of any mediation which neither presupposes anything else
nor can be derived from anything else.
If we take a closer look at this prerogative
that the proposition claims, of being immediately self-evident,
we find that it lies in its formalism,
in the fact that it abstracts from
every qualitative diversity of determinations
and only admits their quantitative equality or inequality.
But for this very reason it is not without presupposition or mediation;
the quantitative determination,
which alone comes into consideration in it,
is only by virtue of the abstraction from qualitative differentiation
and from the concept determinations.
Lines, figures, posited as equal to each other,
are understood only according to their magnitude.
A triangle is posited as equal to a square,
not however as triangle to square
but only according to magnitude, etc.
Nor does the concept and its determinations enter into this syllogism;
there is in it, therefore, no conceptual comprehension at all;
the understanding is also not faced here by even
the formal, abstract determinations of the concept.
The self-evidence of this syllogism rests,
therefore, solely on the indigence and abstractness
of its mode of thought.

3. But the result of the syllogism of existence is not
just this abstraction from all determinateness of the concept;
the negativity of the immediate and abstract determinations
that emerged from it has yet another positive side,
namely that in the abstract determinateness
its other has been posited
and the determinateness has thereby become concrete.

In the first place, the syllogisms of existence
all have one another for presupposition,
and the extremes conjoined in the conclusion are truly conjoined,
in and for themselves, only inasmuch as they are otherwise
united by an identity grounded elsewhere;
the middle term, as constituted in the syllogisms we have examined,
ought to be the conceptual unity of these syllogisms
but is in fact only a formal determinateness
that is not posited as their concrete unity.
But what is thus presupposed by each and
every of these mediations is not merely
a given immediacy in general,
as is the case for the mathematical syllogism,
but is itself a mediation,
namely of each of the other two syllogisms.
Therefore, what is truly present here is not
a mediation based on a given immediacy,
but a mediation based on mediation.
And this mediation is not quantitative,
not one that abstracts from the form of mediation,
but is rather a self-referring mediation,
or the mediation of reflection.
The circle of reciprocal presupposing
which these syllogisms bring to closure is
the turning back of this presupposing into itself;
a presupposing that in this turning back forms a totality,
and has the other to which every single syllogism refers,
not outside by virtue of abstraction,
but included within the circle.

Further, from the side of the single determinations of form
it has been shown that in this whole of formal syllogisms
each single determination has in turn occupied
the place of the middle term.
As immediate, this term was determined as particularity;
thereupon, through dialectical movement
it determined itself as singularity and universality.
Likewise did each of these determinations occupy the
places of both of the two extremes.
The merely negative result is the dissolution of
the qualitative determinations of form
into the merely quantitative, mathematical syllogism.
But what we truly have here is the positive result,
namely that mediation occurs,
not through any single qualitative determinateness of form,
but through the concrete identity of the determinacies.
The deficiency and formalism of the three figures of the syllogism
just considered consists precisely in this,
that one such single determinateness was
supposed to constitute the middle term in it.
Mediation has thus determined itself as
the indifference of the immediate or abstract determinations of form
and the positive reflection of one into the other.
The immediate syllogism of existence has thereby
passed over into the syllogism of reflection.
