The syllogism of necessity.

C. THE SYLLOGISM OF NECESSITY

The mediating middle has now determined itself
(1) as simple determinate universality,
like the particularity in the syllogism of existence,
but (2) as objective universality,
that is to say, one that, like
the allness of the syllogism of reflection,
contains the whole determinateness of the different extremes;
this is a completed but simple universality,
the universal nature of the fact, the genus.
This syllogism is full of content,
because the abstract middle term of the syllogism of existence
has posited itself to be determinate difference,
in the way it is as the middle term of the syllogism of reflection,
but this difference has again reflected itself into simple identity.
This syllogism is for this reason the syllogism of necessity,
because its middle term is not any adventitious immediate content
but is the immanent reflection of the determinateness of the extremes.
These have their inner identity in the middle term,
whose content determinations are
the form determinations of the extremes.
Consequently, what differentiates the terms is a form
which is external and unessential
and the terms themselves are as moments of a necessary existence.
This syllogism is at first immediate and formal
in the sense that what holds the terms together is
the essential nature, as content,
and this content is in the distinguished terms only in different form,
and the extremes are by themselves only an unessential subsistence.
The realization of this syllogism is a matter
of determining it  in such a way that
the extremes are equally posited as this totality
which initially the middle term is,
and the necessity of the connection,
which is at first only the substantial content,
shall be a connection of the posited form.

a. The categorical syllogism

1. The categorical syllogism has
the categorical judgment
for one or for both of its premises.
Associated with this syllogism,
just as with that judgment,
is the more specific signification
that its middle term is
the objective universality.
Superficially, the categorical syllogism is
also taken for nothing more than
a mere syllogism of inherence.

Taken in its full import,
the categorical syllogism is
the first syllogism of necessity,
one in which a subject is
conjoined with a predicate
through its substance.
But when elevated to
the sphere of the concept,
substance is the universal,
so posited to be in and for itself
that it has for its form
or mode of being, not accidentality,
as it has in the relation specific to it,
but the determination of the concept.
Its differences are therefore
the extremes of the syllogism,
specifically universality and singularity.
This universality, as contrasted with the genus
that more closely defines the middle term,
is abstract or is a universal determinateness:
it is the accidentality of substance
summed up in a simple determinateness
which is, however, the substance's
essential difference, its specific difference.
Singularity, for its part, is the actual,
in itself the concrete unity of genus and determinateness
though here, in the immediate syllogism,
it is immediate singularity at first,
accidentality summed up in the form of
a subsistence existing for itself.
The connection of this extreme term to
the middle term constitutes a categorical judgment;
but since the other extreme term also, as just determined,
expresses the specific difference of the genus
or its determinate principle,
this other premise is also categorical.

2. This syllogism, as the first and
therefore immediate syllogism of necessity,
comes in the first instance under
the schema of the formal syllogism, S-P-U.
But since the middle term is
the essential nature of the singular
and not just one or other of its determinacies or properties,
and likewise the extreme of universality is
not any abstract universal,
nor just any singular quality either,
but is rather the universal determinateness of the genus,
its specific difference,
we no longer have the contingency of a subject
being conjoined with just any quality
through just any middle term.
Consequently, since
the connections of the extremes with the middle term
also do not have the external immediacy
that they have in the syllogism of existence,
we do not have coming into play
the demand for proof in the sense in which
it occurred in the case of that other syllogism
and led to an infinite progression.

Further, this syllogism does not presuppose
its conclusion for its premises,
as in the syllogism of reflection.
The terms, in keeping with the substantial content,
stand to one another in a connection of identity
that exists in and for itself;
we have here one essence running through the three terms;
an essence in which the determinations of
singularity, particularity, and universality
are only formal moments.
To this extent, therefore,
the categorical syllogism is no longer subjective;
in that connection of identity, objectivity begins;
the middle term is the identity,
full of content, of its extremes,
and these are contained in it in their
self-subsistence,
for their self-subsistence is
the said substantial universality
which is the genus.
The subjective element of the syllogism
consists in the indifferent subsistence
of the extremes with respect to the concept
or the middle term.

3. But there is still a subjective element in this syllogism,
for that identity is still the substantial identity
or content but is not yet identity of form at the same time.
The identity of the concept still is an inner bond
and therefore, as connection, still necessity;
the universality of the middle term is
solid, positive identity,
but is not equally the negativity of its extremes.
The immediacy of this syllogism,
which is not yet posited as what it is in itself,
is more precisely present in this way.
The truly immediate element
of the syllogism is the singular.
This singular is subsumed under its genus as middle term;
but subsumed under the same genus are also
an indeterminate number of many other singulars;
it is therefore contingent that only this singular
is posited as subsumed under it.
But further, this contingency does not belong
only to an external reflection
that finds the singular posited in
the syllogism to be contingent
by comparison with others;
on the contrary, it is because the singular
is itself connected to the middle term
as its objectivity universality
that it is posited as contingent,
as a subjective actuality.
From the other side,
because the subject is an immediate singular,
it contains determinations that are not
contained in the middle term as the universal nature;
it also has, therefore, a concrete existence
which is indifferent to the middle term,
determined for itself and with a content of its own.
Therefore, conversely, this other term also has
an indifferent immediacy and a concrete existence
distinct from the former.
The same relation also obtains between
the middle term and the other extreme;
for this too likewise has the determination of immediacy,
hence of a being which is contingent
with respect to the middle term.

Accordingly, what is posited
in the categorical syllogism are
on the one hand,
extremes that are so related to the middle term
that they have objective universality
or self-subsistent nature in themselves,
and are at the same time immediate actualities,
hence indifferent to one another.
On the other hand,
they are equally contingent,
or their immediacy is as sublated in their identity.
But this identity, because of the self-subsistence
and totality of the actuality,
is only formal, inner identity,
and the syllogism of necessity has thereby
determined itself to the hypothetical syllogism.

b. The hypothetical syllogism

1. The hypothetical judgment contains only
the necessary connection without
the immediacy of the connected terms.
“If A is, so is B”;
or, the being of A is also just as much
the being of an other, of the B;
with this, it is not as yet said either that A is, or that B is.
The hypothetical syllogism adds this immediacy of being:

If A is, so is B,
But A is,
Therefore B is.

The minor premise expresses by itself
the immediate being of the A.
But it is not only this that is added to the judgment.
The conclusion contains the connection of subject and predicate,
not as the abstract copula,
but as the accomplished mediating unity.
The being of the A is to be taken, therefore,
not as mere immediacy but essentially
as middle term of the syllogism.
This needs closer examination.

2. In the first place,
the connection of the hypothetical judgment is
the necessity or the inner substantial identity
associated with the external diversity of concrete existence;
an identical content lying internally as its basis.
The two sides of the judgment are both, therefore,
not an immediate being, but a being held in necessity,
hence one which is at the same time sublated
or only being as appearance.
The two behave, moreover, as sides of the judgment,
as universality and singularity;
the one, therefore, is the above content
as totality of determinations,
the other as actuality.
Yet it is a matter of indifference
which side is taken as universality
and which as singularity.
That is to say, inasmuch as
the conditions are still the inner,
abstract element of an actuality,
they are the universal,
and it is by being held together
in one singularity
that they step into actuality.
Conversely, the conditions are
a dismembered and dispersed appearance
that gains unity and meaning,
and a universally valid existence,
only in actuality.
The relation that is here being assumed
between the two sides of condition and conditioned
may however also be taken to be one of
cause and effect, ground and consequence.
This is a matter of indifference here.
The relation of condition, however,
corresponds more closely to the one that
obtains in the hypothetical judgment and syllogism
inasmuch as condition is essentially
an indifferent concrete existence,
whereas ground and cause are inherently a transition;
moreover, condition is a more universal condition
in that it comprehends both sides of the relation,
since effect, consequence, etc.,
are just as much the condition of cause and ground
as these are the condition of them.

Now A is the mediating being in so far as it is,
first, an immediate being, an indifferent actuality,
but, second, in so far as it is equally
inherently contingent, self-sublating being.
What translates the conditions into the actuality
of the new shape of which they are the conditions is
the fact that they are not being as an abstract immediacy,
but being according to its concept
becoming in the first instance,
but more determinedly
(since the concept is no longer transition)
singularity as self-referring negative unity.
The conditions are a dispersed material
awaiting and requiring application;
this negativity is the mediating means,
the free unity of the concept.
It determines itself as activity,
for this middle term is
the contradiction of objective universality,
or of the totality of the identical content
and the indifferent immediacy.
This middle term is no longer, therefore,
merely inner but existent necessity;
the objective universality contains its
self-reference as simple immediacy, as being.
In the categorical syllogism this moment is at first
a determination of the extremes;
but as against the objective universality of the middle term,
it determines itself as contingency,
hence as something which is only posited and also sublated,
something that has returned into the concept
or into the middle terms as unity,
a unity which is now in its objectivity also being.

The conclusion, “therefore B is,”
expresses the same contradiction,
that B exists immediately
but at the same time
through an other or as mediated.
According to its form,
it is therefore the same concept
that the middle term is,
distinguished from necessity only as the necessary,
in the totally superficial form of singularity
as contrasted with universality.
The absolute content of A and B is the same;
for ordinary representation,
they are two different names
for the same basic thing,
since representation fixes the appearances
of the diversified shape of existence
and distinguishes the necessary from its necessity;
but to the extent that necessity were to be separated from B,
the latter would not be the necessary.
What we have here, therefore, is
the identity of the mediating term and the mediated.

3. The hypothetical syllogism is the first
to display the necessary connection
as a connectedness through form or negative unity,
just as the categorical syllogism displays
it through positive unity,
the solid content, the objective universality.
But necessity merges with the necessary;
the form-activity of translating
the conditioning actuality into the conditioned
is in itself the unity into which
the determinacies of the oppositions
previously let free into indifferent existence are sublated,
and where the difference of A and B is an empty name.
The unity is therefore a unity reflected into itself,
and hence an identical content,
and is this content not only implicitly in itself
but, through this syllogism, it is also posited,
for the being of A is also not its own being
but that of B and vice versa,
and in general the being of the one
is the being of the other
and, as determined in the conclusion,
their immediate being or indifferent determinateness
is a mediated one;
therefore, their externality has been sublated,
and what is posited is their unity withdrawn into itself.
The mediation of the syllogism has thereby determined itself
as singularity, immediacy, and self-referring negativity,
or as a differentiating identity that retrieves itself
into itself out of this differentiation, as absolute form,
and for that very reason as objective universality,
self-identical existent content.
In this determination,
the syllogism is the disjunctive syllogism.

c. The disjunctive syllogism

As the hypothetical syllogism comes in general
under the schema of the second figure of
the formal syllogism, U-S-P,
so the disjunctive comes
under the schema of the third, S-U-P.
The middle term, however, is
a universality replete with form;
it has determined itself as totality,
as developed objective universality.
The middle term, therefore,
is universality as well as
particularity and singularity.
As that universality,
it is in the first place
the substantial identity of the genus,
but this identity is secondly one
in which particularity is included,
but again, included as equal to it
therefore as a universal sphere
that contains its total particularity,
the genus sorted out in its species,
an A which is B as well as C and D.
But particularization is differentiation
and as such equally the either-or of B, C, D negative unity,
the reciprocal exclusion of the determinations.
This excluding, moreover, is now not just reciprocal,
the determination not merely relative,
but is also just as much self-referring determination,
the particular as singularity to the exclusion of the others.

A is either B or C or D,
But A is B,
Therefore A is neither C nor D.
Or also:
A is either B or C or D,
But A is neither C nor D,
Therefore A is B.

A is subject not only in the two premises
but also in the conclusion.
It is a universal in the first premise
and in its predicate the universal sphere
particularized in the totality of its species;
in the second premise, it is as a determinate,
or as a species;
in the conclusion it is posited as the excluding,
singular determinateness.
Or again, in the minor it is already exclusive singularity,
and in the conclusion it is positively posited
as the determinate that it is.

Consequently, what as such appears to be meditated is
the universality of A with the singularity.
But the mediating means is this A
which is the universal sphere of its particularizations
and is determined as a singular.
What is posited in the disjunctive syllogism is thus
the truth of the hypothetical syllogism,
the unity of the mediator and the mediated,
and for that reason the disjunctive syllogism is
equally no longer a syllogism at all.
For the middle term which is posited in it
as the totality of the concept itself contains
the two extremes in their complete determinateness.
The extremes, as distinct from this middle term,
are only a positedness to which
there no longer accrues any proper determinateness
of its own as against the middle term.

If we consider the matter with narrower reference
to the hypothetical syllogism,
we find that there was in the latter
a substantial identity as the inner bond of necessity,
and a negative unity distinct from it,
namely the activity or the form
that translated one existence into another.
The disjunctive syllogism is in general
in the determination of universality,
its middle term is the A as genus and as perfectly determined;
also posited through this unity is the earlier inner content
and, conversely, the positedness
or the form is not the external negative unity
over against an indifferent existence
but is identical with that solid content.
The whole form determination of the concept is
posited in its determinate difference
and at the same time in the simple identity of the concept.

In this way the formalism of the syllogistic inference,
and consequently the subjectivity of the syllogism
and of the concept in general,
has sublated itself.
This formal or subjective factor consisted in that
the middle mediating the extremes is
the concept as an abstract determination
and is therefore distinct from
the terms whose unity it is.
In the completion of the syllogism,
where the objective universality is
equally posited as the totality
of the form determinations,
the distinction of mediating and mediated has
on the contrary fallen away.
That which is mediated is itself
an essential moment of what mediates it,
and each moment is the totality of what is mediated.

The figures of the syllogism
exhibit each determinateness of
the concept singly as the middle term,
a middle term which is at the same time
the concept as an ought,
the requirement that the mediating factor
be the concept's totality.
The different genera of the syllogism
exhibit instead the stages in the repletion
or concretion of the middle term.
In the formal syllogism the middle is
posited as totality only through all the determinacies,
but each singly, discharging the function of mediation.
In the syllogism of reflection,
the middle term is the unity
gathering together externally
the determinations of the extremes.
In the syllogism of necessity the middle
has determined itself as a unity
which is just as developed and total as it is
simple, and the form of the syllogism,
which consisted in the difference of
the middle term over against its extremes,
has thereby sublated itself.
With this the concept in general has been realized;
more precisely, it has gained
the kind of reality which is objectivity.
The first reality was that the concept,
in itself negative unity, partitions itself
and as judgment posits its determinations
in determinate and indifferent difference,
and in the syllogism it then sets itself over against them.
Since it is still in this way the inwardness
of this now acquired externality,
in the course of the syllogisms this externality is
equated with the inner unity;
the different determinations return into the latter
through the mediation that unites them at first in a third term,
and as a result the externality exhibits, in itself,
the concept which, for its part,
is no longer distinct from it as inner unity.
Conversely, however, that determinateness of the concept
which was considered as reality is equally a positedness.
For the identity of the concept's inwardness and externality
has been exhibited as the truth of the concept
not only in this result;
on the contrary, already in the judgment
the moments of the concept remain,
even in their reciprocal indifference,
determinations that have significance
only in their connection.
The syllogism is mediation,
the complete concept in its positedness.
Its movement is the sublation of this mediation
in which nothing is in and for itself,
but each thing is only through the meditation of an other.
The result is therefore an immediacy that has emerged
through the sublation of the mediation,
a being which is equally identical with mediation
and is the concept that has restored itself
out of, and in, its otherness.

This being is therefore a fact
which is in and for itself: objectivity.
