B. CONTINUOUS AND DISCRETE MAGNITUDE

1. Quantity contains the two moments of continuity and discreteness.
It is to be posited in both, in each as its determination.
It is already from the start the immediate unity of the two,
that is, quantity is itself posited at first
only in one of the two determinations, that of continuity,
and as such is continuous magnitude.

Or continuity is indeed one of the moments of quantity
which is brought to completion only with the other, discreteness.
But quantity is concrete unity only in so far as
it is the unity of distinct moments.
These are to be taken, therefore, also as distinct,
without however resolving them again
into attraction and repulsion
but, rather, as they truly are,
each remaining in its unity with the other,
that is, remaining the whole.
Continuity is only the compact unity
holding together as unity of the discrete;
posited as such, it is no longer only moment
but the whole quantity: continuous magnitude.

2. Immediate quantity is continuous magnitude.
Quantity, however, is not as such an immediate;
immediacy is a determinateness,
the sublated being of which is precisely quantity.
Quantity is to be posited, therefore,
in the determinateness immanent to it,
and this is the one.
Quantity is discrete magnitude.

Discreteness is, like continuity, a moment of quantity,
but is itself also the whole quantity
just because it is a moment in it, the whole,
and therefore as distinct moment does not
diverge from its unity with the other moment.
Quantity is the outsideness-of-one-another as such,
and continuous magnitude is this outsideness-of-one-another
onwardly positing itself without negation
as an internally self-same connectedness.
On the other hand, discrete magnitude is this
outsideness-of-one-another as discontinuous, as broken off.
With this aggregate of ones, however,
the aggregate of atom and void,
repulsion in general, is not thereby reinstated.
Because discrete magnitude is quantity,
its discreteness is itself continuous.
Such a continuity in the discrete consists
in the ones being the same as one another,
or in that they have the same unity.
Discrete magnitude is therefore
the one-outside-the-other of
the many ones as of a same;
not the many ones in general,
but posited rather as the many of a unity.

