A. PURE QUANTITY

Quantity is sublated being-for-itself.
The repelling one that behaved only
negatively towards the excluded one,
now that it has gone over in connection with it,
behaves towards the other as identical to itself
and has therefore lost its determination;
being-for-itself has passed over into attraction.
The absolute obduracy of the one has melted away
into this unity which, however, as containing the one, is
at the same time determined by the repulsion residing in it;
as unity of the self-externality, it is unity with itself.
Attraction is in this way the moment of continuity in quantity.

Continuity is therefore simple, self-same reference to itself
unbroken by any limit or exclusion;
not, however, immediate unity but the unity of ones
which have existence for themselves.
Still contained in it is the outside-one-another of plurality,
though at the same time as something without distinctions, unbroken.
Plurality is posited in continuity as it implicitly is in itself;
the many are each what the others are,
each is like the other,
and the plurality is, consequently,
simple and undifferentiated equality.
Continuity is this moment of self-equality
of the outsideness-of-one-another,
the self-continuation of the different ones
into the ones from which they are distinguished.

In continuity, therefore, magnitude immediately possesses
the moment of discreteness, repulsion as now a moment in quantity.
Steady continuity is self-equality,
but of many that do not become exclusive;
it is repulsion that first expands self-equality to continuity.
Hence discreteness is, for its part, a discreteness of confluents,
of ones that do not have the void to connect them,
not the negative, but their own steady advance
and, in the many, do not interrupt this self-equality.

Quantity is the unity of these moments,
of continuity and discreteness.
At first, however, it is this continuity
in the form of one of them, of continuity,
as a result of the dialectic of the being-for-itself
which has collapsed into the form of self-equal immediacy.
Quantity is as such this simple result
in so far as the being-for-itself has
not yet developed its moments
and has not posited them within it.
Quantity contains these moments at first
as being-for-itself posited in its truth.
It was the determination of being-in-itself
to be self-sublating self-reference,
a perpetual coming-out-of-itself.
But what is repelled is itself;
repulsion is thus a creative flowing away from itself.
On account of the sameness of what is repelled,
this discerning is unbroken continuity;
and on account of the coming-out-of-itself,
this continuity is at the same time,
without being broken off, a plurality,
a plurality which persists just as
immediately in its equality with itself.

