
C. CONTRADICTION

1. Difference in general contains both its sides as moments;
in diversity, these sides fall apart as indifferent to each other;
and in opposition as such, they are the moments of difference,
each determined by the other and hence only moments.
But in opposition these moments are equally determined within,
indifferent to each other and mutually exclusive,
self-subsisting determinations of reflection.

One is the positive and the other the negative,
but the former as a positive which is such within,
and the latter as a negative which is such within.
Each has indifferent self-subsistence for itself
by virtue of having the reference to
its other moment within it;
each moment is thus the whole self-contained opposition.
As this whole, each moment is self-mediated
through its other and contains this other.
But it is also self-mediated
through the non-being of its other
and is, therefore, a unity existing for itself
and excluding the other from itself.

Since the self-subsisting determination of reflection
excludes the other in the same respect as it contains it
and is self-subsisting for precisely this reason,
in its self-subsistence the determination excludes
its own self-subsistence from itself.
For this self-subsistence consists in
that it contains the determination
which is other than it in itself
and does not refer to anything external
for just this reason;
but no less immediately in that
it is itself and excludes from itself
the determination that negates it.
And so it is contradiction.

Difference as such is already implicitly contradiction;
for it is the unity of beings which are,
only in so far as they are not one
and it is the separation of beings which are,
only in so far as they are separated
in the same reference connecting them.
The positive and the negative, however,
are the posited contradiction,
for, as negative unities,
they are precisely their self-positing
and therein each the sublating of itself
and the positing of its opposite.
They constitute determining reflection as exclusive;
for the excluding is one act of distinguishing
and each of the distinguished beings,
as exclusive, is itself the whole act of excluding,
and so each excludes itself internally.

If we look at the two self-subsisting
determinations of reflection on their own,
the positive is positedness as reflected
into likeness with itself
positedness which is not reference to another,
hence subsistence inasmuch as
the positedness is sublated and excluded.
But with this the positive makes itself
into the reference of a non-being into a positedness.
In this way the positive is contradiction in that,
as the positing of self-identity by the
excluding of the negative,
it makes itself into a negative,
hence into the other
which it excludes from itself.
This last, as excluded, is posited
free of the one that excludes;
hence, as reflected into itself and itself as excluding.
The reflection that excludes is thus
the positing of the positive as excluding the other,
so that this positing immediately is
the positing of its other which excludes it.

This is the absolute contradiction of the positive;
but it is immediately the absolute contradiction of the negative;
the positing of both in one reflection.
Considered in itself as against the positive,
the negative is positedness as reflected into unlikeness to itself,
the negative as negative.
But the negative is itself the unlike,
the non-being of another;
consequently, reflection is in its unlikeness
its reference rather to itself.
Negation in general is the negative
as quality or immediate determinateness;
but taken as negative, it is referred to
the negative of itself, to its other.
If this second negative is taken only
as identical with the first,
then it is also only immediate,
just like the first;
they are not taken, therefore,
as each the other of the other,
hence not as negatives:
the negative is not at all an immediate.
But now, since each is moreover equally
the same as what the other is,
this reference connecting them as unequal
is just as much their identical connection.

This is therefore the same contradiction which the positive is,
namely positedness or negation as self-reference.
But the positive is only implicitly this contradiction,
is contradiction only in itself;
the negative, on the contrary, is the posited contradiction;
for in its reflection into itself,
as a negative which is in and for itself
or a negative which is identical with itself,
its determination is to be the not-identical,
the exclusion of identity.
The negative is this,
to be identical with itself over against identity,
and consequently, because of this excluding reflection,
to exclude itself from itself.

The negative is therefore the whole opposition
the opposition which, as opposition, rests upon itself;
distinction that absolutely does not refer itself to another;
distinction which, as opposition, excludes identity from itself,
but thereby also excludes itself,
for as reference to itself it determines itself
as the very identity which it excludes.

2. Contradiction resolves itself.

In the self-excluding reflection
we have just considered,
the positive and the negative,
each in its self-subsistence,
sublates itself;
each is simply the passing over,
or rather the self-translating of itself into its opposite.
This internal ceaseless vanishing of the opposites is
the first unity that arises by virtue of contradiction;
it is the null.

But contradiction does not contain merely the negative;
it also contains the positive;
or the self-excluding reflection is
at the same time positing reflection;
the result of contradiction is not only the null.
The positive and the negative constitute
the positedness of the self-subsistence;
their own self-negation sublates it.
It is this positedness which in truth
founders to the ground in contradiction.

The immanent reflection by virtue of which
the sides of opposition are turned into
self-subsistent self-references is,
first of all, their self-subsistence as distinct moments;
thus they are this self-subsistence only in themselves,
for they are still opposites,
and that they are in themselves self-subsistent
constitutes their positedness.
But their excluding reflection
sublates this positedness,
turns them into self-subsistent beings
existing in and for themselves,
such as are self-subsistent not only in themselves
but by virtue of their negative reference to their other;
in this way, their self-subsistence is also posited.
But, further, by thus being posited as self-subsistent,
they make themselves into a positedness.
They fate themselves to founder,
since they determine themselves as self-identical,
yet in their self-identity they are rather the negative,
a self-identity which is reference-to-other.

However, on closer examination,
this excluding reflection is not only
this formal determination.
It is self-subsistence existing in itself,
and the sublating of this positedness
is only through this sublating a unity that
exists for itself and is in fact self-subsistent.
Of course, through the sublating of otherness or positedness,
positedness or the negative of an other is indeed present again.
But in fact, this negation is not just a return to the first
immediate reference to the other,
is not positedness as sublated immediacy,
but positedness as sublated positedness.
The excluding reflection of self-subsistence,
since it is excluding,
makes itself a positedness but is just as much
the sublation of its positedness.
It is sublating reference to itself;
in that reference, it first sublates the negative
and it secondly posits itself as a negative,
and it is only this posited negative that it sublates;
in sublating the negative,
it both posits and sublates it at the same time.
In this way the exclusive determination is
itself that other of itself of which it is the negation;
the sublation of this positedness is not, therefore,
once more positedness as the negative of an other,
but is self-withdrawal, positive self-unity.
Self-subsistence is thus unity that turns back into itself
by virtue of its own negation,
for it turns into itself through the negation of its positedness.
It is the unity of essence to be identical with itself
through the negation not of an other, but of itself.

3. According to this positive side,
since self-subsistence in opposition,
as excluding reflection,
makes itself into a positedness
and equally sublates this positedness,
not only has opposition foundered
but in foundering it has gone back
to its foundation, to its ground.
The excluding reflection of
the self-subsisting opposition turns it
into a negative, something only posited;
it thereby reduces its formerly self-subsisting determinations,
the positive and the negative,
to determinations which are only determinations;
and the positedness, since it is now made into positedness,
has simply gone back to its unity with itself;
it is simple essence, but essence as ground.
Through the sublating of the determinations of essence,
which are in themselves self-contradictory,
essence is restored,
but restored in the determination of
an exclusive, reflective unity
a simple unity which determines itself as negation,
but in this positedness is immediately like itself
and withdrawn into itself.

In the first place, therefore, because of its contradiction,
the self-subsisting opposition goes back into a ground;
this opposition is what comes first,
the immediate from which the beginning is made,
while the sublated opposition
or the sublated positedness is itself a positedness.
Accordingly, essence is as ground a positedness,
something that has become.
But conversely, only this has been posited,
namely that the opposition or the positedness is
something sublated, only is as positedness.
As ground, therefore, essence is excluding reflection
because it makes itself into a positedness;
because the opposition from which the start
was just now made and was the immediate is
the merely posited determinate self-subsistence of essence;
because opposition only sublates itself within,
whereas essence is in its determinateness reflected into itself.
As ground, therefore, essence excludes
itself from itself, it posits itself;
its positedness which is what is excluded
is only as positedness,
as identity of the negative with itself.
This self-subsistent is the negative
posited as the negative,
something self-contradictory
which, consequently, remains in
the essence as in its ground.

The resolved contradiction is therefore ground,
essence as unity of the positive and the negative.
In opposition, determinateness has progressed to self-subsistence;
but ground is this self-subsistence as completed;
in it, the negative is self-subsistent essence, but as negative;
and, as self-identical in this negativity,
ground is thus equally the positive.
In ground, therefore, opposition and its contradiction
are just as much removed as preserved.
Ground is essence as positive self-identity
which, however, at the same time
refers itself to itself as negativity
and therefore determines itself,
making itself into an excluded positedness;
but this positedness is the whole self-subsisting essence,
and essence is ground, self-identical in its negation and positive.
The self-contradictory self-subsistent opposition
was itself, therefore, already ground;
all that was added to it was the determination of self-unity
which emerges as each of the self-subsisting opposites
sublates itself and makes itself into its other,
thereby founders and sinks to the ground
but therein also reunites itself with itself;
thus in this foundering, that is,
in its positedness or in the negation,
it rather is for the first time the essence
that is reflected into itself and self-identical.
