
C. THE DISSOLUTION OF APPEARANCE

The world that exists in and for itself is
the determinate ground of the world of appearance
and is this only in so far as, within it,
it is the negative moment
and hence the totality of the content determinations
and their alterations that correspond to that world of appearance,
yet constitutes at the same time its completely opposed side.
The two worlds thus relate to each other in such a way
that what in the world of appearance is positive,
in the world existing in and for itself is negative,
and, conversely, what is negative in the former
is positive in the latter.
The north pole in the world of appearance
is the south pole in and for itself, and vice-versa;
positive electricity is in itself negative, and so forth.
What is evil in the world of appearance is
in and for itself goodness and a piece of good luck.

In fact it is precisely in this opposition
of the two worlds that their difference has disappeared,
and what was supposed to be
the world existing in and for itself is
itself the world of appearance
and this last, conversely,
the world essential within.
The world of appearance is in the first instance
determined as reflection into otherness,
so that its determinations and concrete existences have
their ground and subsistence in an other;
but because this other, as other,
is likewise reflected into an other,
the other to which they both refer is
one which sublates itself as other;
the two consequently refer to themselves;
the world of appearance is within it,
therefore, law equal to itself.
Conversely, the world existing in and for itself is
in the first instance self-identical content,
exempt from otherness and change;
but this content, as complete reflection of
the world of appearance into itself,
or because its diversity is difference
reflected into itself and absolute,
consequently contains negativity as a moment
and self-reference as reference to otherness;
it thereby becomes self-opposed, self-inverting, essenceless content.
Further, this content of the world existing in and for itself has
thereby also retained the form of immediate concrete existence.
For it is at first the ground of the world of appearance;
but since it has opposition in it, it is equally
sublated ground and immediate concrete existence.

Thus the world of appearance and the essential world are
each, each within it, the totality of
self-identical reflection and of reflection-into-other,
or of being-in-and-for-itself.
They are both the self-subsisting wholes of concrete existence;
the one is supposed to be only reflected concrete existence,
the other immediate concrete existence;
but each continues into the other and, within, is
therefore the identity of these two moments.
What we have, therefore, is this totality
that splits into two totalities,
the one reflected totality and the other immediate totality.
Both, in the first instance, are self-subsistent;
but they are this only as totalities,
and this they are inasmuch as each essentially contains
the moment of the other in it.
Hence the distinct self-subsistence of each,
one determined as immediate and one as reflected,
is now so posited as to be essentially the reference to the other
and to have its self-subsistence in this unity of the two.

We started off from the law of appearance;
this law is the identity of a content
and another content different from it,
so that the positedness of the one
is the positedness of the other.
Still present in law is this difference,
that the identity of its sides is
at first only an internal identity
which the two sides do not yet have in them.
Consequently the identity is, for its part, not realized;
the content of law is not identical
but indifferent, diversified.
This content, therefore, is on its side only in itself
so determined that the positedness of the one is
the positedness of the other;
this determination is not yet present in it.
But now law is realized;
its inner identity is existent at the same time
and, conversely, the content of law is raised to ideality;
for it is sublated within, is reflected into itself,
for each side has the other in it,
and therefore is truly identical
with it and with itself.

Thus is law essential relation.
The truth of the unessential world is at first
a world in and for itself and other to it;
but this world is a totality,
for it is itself and the first world;
both are thus immediate concrete existences
and consequently reflections in their otherness,
and therefore equally truly reflected into themselves.
“World” signifies in general
the formless totality of a manifoldness;
this world has foundered both as essential world
and as world of appearance;
it is still a totality or a universe
but as essential relation.
Two totalities of content have arisen in appearance;
at first they are determined as
indifferently self-subsisting vis-à-vis each other,
each having indeed form within it
but not with respect to the other;
this form has however demonstrated
itself to be their connecting reference,
and the essential relation is
the consummation of their unity of form.
