
B. THE PARTICULAR CONCEPT

Determinateness as such belongs to being and the qualitative;
as the determinateness of the concept, it is particularity.
It is not a limit, as if it were related to an other beyond it,
but is rather, as just shown, the universal's own immanent moment;
in particularity, therefore, the universal is not
in an other but simply and solely with itself.

The particular contains the universality
that constitutes its substance;
the genus is unaltered in its species;
these do not differ from the universal
but only from each other.
The particular has one and the same universality as
the other particulars to which it is related.
The diversity of these particulars,
because of their identity with the universal, is
as such at the same time universal;
it is totality.
The particular, therefore,
does not only contain the universal
but exhibits it also through its determinateness;
accordingly the universal constitutes a sphere
that the particular must exhaust.
This totality, inasmuch as the determinateness
of the particular is taken as mere diversity,
appears as completeness.
In this respect, the species are complete
simply in so far as there are no more of them.
There is no inner standard or principle available for them,
for their diversity is just the dispersed difference
for which the universality,
which is for itself absolute unity,
is a merely external reflex
and an unconstrained, contingent completeness.
But diversity passes over into opposition,
into an immanent connection of diverse moments.
Particularity, however,
because it is universality,
is this immanent connection,
not by virtue of a transition,
but in and for itself.
It is totality intrinsically,
and simple determinateness,
essential principle.
It has no other determinateness than
that posited by the universal itself
and resulting from it in the following manner.

The particular is the universal itself,
but it is its difference or reference to an other,
its outwardly reflecting shine;
but there is no other at hand from which
the particular would be differentiated
than the universal itself.
The universal determines itself,
and so is itself the particular;
the determinateness is its difference;
it is only differentiated from itself.
Its species are therefore
only (a) the universal itself
and (b) the particular.
The universal is as concept itself and its opposite,
and this opposite is in turn the universal itself
as its posited determinateness;
the universal overreaches it
and, in it, it is with itself.
Thus it is the totality and the principle of its diversity,
which is determined wholly and solely through itself.

There is, therefore, no other
true logical division than this,
that the concept sets itself on one side
as the immediate, indeterminate universality;
it is this very indeterminateness
that makes its determinateness,
or that it is a particular.
The two are both a particular
and are therefore coordinated.
Both, as particular, are also
determinate as against the universal,
and in this sense they are subordinated to it.
But even this universal,
as against which the particular is determined,
is for that reason itself also
just one of the opposing sides.
When we speak of two opposing sides,
we must repeat that the two constitute the particular,
not just together, as if they were alike
in being particular only for external reflection,
but because their determinateness over against each other is
at the same time essentially only one determinateness;
it is the negativity which in the universal is simple.

Difference, as it presents itself here,
is in its concept and therefore in its truth.
All previous difference has this unity in the concept.
As it is present immediately in being,
difference is the limit of an other;
as present in reflection, it is relative,
posited as referring essentially to its other;
here is where the unity of the concept
thus begins to be posited;
at first, however, the unity is only
a reflective shine in an other.
The true significance of the transitoriness
and the dissolution of these determinations is just this,
that they attain to their concept, to their truth;
being, existence, something,
or whole and part, and so on,
substance and accidents, cause and effect,
are thought determinations on their own;
as determinate concepts, however,
they are grasped in so far as each
is cognized in unity with its others
or in opposition to them.
Whole and parts, for example,
or cause and effect, and so on,
are not yet diverse terms
that are determined as particular
relatively to each other,
for although they implicitly constitute one concept,
their unity has not yet attained the form of universality;
thus the difference as well which is in these relations,
does not yet have the form of being one determinateness.
Cause and effect, for example, are not two diverse concepts
but only one determinate concept,
and causality is, like every concept,
a simple concept.

With respect to completeness,
we have just seen that the determinate moment
of  particularity is complete in the difference
of the universal and the particular,
and that only these two make up the particular species.
To be sure, there are more than two species
to be found in any genus in nature,
and these many species cannot stand
in the same relation to each other
as we have shown.
This is the impotence of nature,
that it cannot abide by and exhibit the rigor of the concept
and loses itself in a blind manifoldness void of concept.
We can wonder at nature,
at the manifoldness of its genera and species,
in the infinite diversity of its shapes,
for wonder is without concept
and its object is the irrational.
It is allowed to nature,
since nature is the self-externality of the concept,
to indulge in this diversity,
just as spirit, even though it possesses
the concept in the shape of concept,
lets itself go into pictorial representation
and runs wild in the infinite manifoldness of the latter.
The manifold genera and species of nature must not be
esteemed to be anything more than arbitrary notions of spirit
engaged in pictorial representations.
Both indeed show traces and intimations of the concept,
but they do not exhibit it in trustworthy copy,
for they are the sides of its free self-externality;
the concept is the absolute power precisely
because it can let its difference go free
in the shape of self-subsistent diversity,
external necessity, accidentality, arbitrariness, opinion;
all of which, however, must not be taken as anything
more than the abstract side of nothingness.

As we have just seen, the determinateness of
the particular is simple as principle,
but it is also simple as a moment of the totality,
determinateness as against the other determinateness.
The concept, in determining or differentiating itself,
behaves negatively towards its unity
and gives itself the form of one
of its ideal moments of being;
as a determinate concept,
it has a determinate existence in general.
But this being no longer has
the significance of mere immediacy,
but has the significance rather of an immediacy
which is equal to itself by virtue of absolute mediation,
an immediacy that equally contains in itself
the other moment of essence or of reflection.
This universality, with which the determinate clothes itself,
is abstract universality.
The particular has this universality in it as its essence;
but in so far as the determinateness
of the difference is posited
and thereby has being,
the universality is form in it,
and the determinateness as such is its content.
Universality becomes form inasmuch as
the difference is something essential,
just as in the pure universal it is, on the contrary,
only absolute negativity
and not a difference posited as such.

Now the determinateness is indeed an abstraction,
as against the other determinateness;
but the other determinateness is only universality itself,
and this too is therefore abstract universality;
and the determinateness of the concept, or particularity,
is again nothing more than determinate universality.
In this universality, the concept is outside itself,
and because it is it, the concept,
which is there outside itself,
the abstract-universal contains
all the moments of the concept.
It is
(a) universality,
(b) determinateness,
(c) the simple unity of the two;
but this unity is immediate,
and the particularity is not
therefore as totality.
Implicitly it is this totality also, and mediation;
it is essentially a reference to the other excluding it,
or the sublation of negation,
namely of the other determinateness
an other that lingers on only as an intention,
for it vanishes immediately revealing itself to be
the same as its other is supposed to be.
Therefore, what makes this universality an abstraction
is that the mediation is only a condition,
or is not posited in it.
Because it is not posited,
the unity of the abstraction has the form of immediacy,
and the content has the form of indifference to its universality,
for the content is nothing but this totality
which is the universality of absolute negativity.
Hence the abstract universal is indeed the concept,
but the unconceptualized concept,
the concept not posited as such.

When we speak of the determinate concept,
what we ordinarily mean is
precisely just this abstract universal.
Even by concept as such,
what is generally understood is
only this unconceptualized concept,
and the understanding is designated as its faculty.
Demonstration belongs to this understanding
inasmuch as it proceeds by way of concepts,
that is to say, only in determinations.
This progression by way of concepts does not therefore
reach past finitude and necessity;
the highest it reaches is the negative infinite,
the abstraction of the highest essence
which is itself the determinateness
of the indeterminateness.
Absolute substance, too, although not this empty abstraction
but on the contrary a totality according to content,
is still abstract, for since it is without absolute form,
its innermost truth is not constituted by the concept;
although it is the identity of universality and particularity,
or of thought and externality,
this identity is not the determinateness of the concept;
there is rather an understanding outside it,
an understanding which is contingent precisely
because it is outside it in which and for which
substance exists in diverse attributes and modes.
Moreover, abstraction is not as empty as
it is usually said to be;
it is the determinate concept;
it has some determinateness or other for its content;
the highest essence also, the pure abstraction,
has the determinateness of indeterminateness,
as just mentioned;
but indeterminateness is a determinateness
because it is supposed to stand opposite the determinate.
But the moment one says what it is,
its intended meaning sublates itself by itself;
for it is spoken of on a par with determinateness,
and from this abstraction the concept and its truth are brought out.
To be sure, any determinate concept is empty
in so far as it does not contain the totality,
but only a one-sided determinateness.
Even when it has otherwise concrete content
such as, for instance, humankind, the state, animal, etc.,
it remains an empty concept inasmuch as its determinateness is
not the principle of its differentiation;
the principle contains the beginning and the essence
of its development and realization;
any other determinateness of the concept is however otiose.
To reproach the concept as such for being empty is
to ignore its absolute determinateness
which is the difference of the concept
and the only true content in the element of the concept.

Here we have the circumstance that explains
why the understanding is nowadays held in such a low repute
and is so much discredited when measured against reason;
it is the fixity which it imparts to determinacies
and consequently to anything finite.
This fixity consists in the form of the abstract universality
just considered that makes them unalterable.
For qualitative determinateness,
and also the determination of reflection,
are essentially limited,
and because of their limitation they entail a reference
to their other;
hence the necessity of their transition and passing away.
But the universality which they possess in the understanding
gives them the form of immanent reflection
and, because this form removes from them
the reference to the other,
they have become unalterable.
Now although this eternity belongs
to the pure concept by nature,
the determinations of the concept are
eternal essentialities only according to form;
but their content is not proportionate to this form
and, therefore, they are not truth, or imperishable.
Their content is not proportionate to the form
because it is not the determinateness itself as universal,
that is, not as totality of the difference of the concept,
or is not itself the whole form;
the form of the limited understanding is
for this reason itself imperfect universality,
that is to say, abstract universality.
But further, we must pay due respect to the
infinite force of the understanding
in splitting the concrete into abstract determinacies
and plumbing the depth of the difference,
this force which alone is at the same time
the mighty power causing the transition of the determinacies.
The concrete of intuition is a totality,
but a sensuous totality,
a real material that subsists in space and time,
part outside part, each indifferent to the other;
surely this lack of unity in a manifold that
makes it the content of intuition ought not to be credited
as privileging it over the universal of the understanding.
The mutability that the manifold exhibits
in intuition already points to the universal;
but all of the manifold that comes to intuition is
just more of the same, an equally alterable other,
not the universal that one would expect to appear and take its place.
But least of all should we reckon to the credit of such sciences
as for example Geometry and Arithmetic
that their material carries an intuitive element with it,
or imagine that their propositions are grounded by it.
On the contrary, the presence of that element renders
the material of these sciences of an inferior nature;
the intuition of figures or numbers is
of no help to the science of figures and numbers;
only the thought of them produces this science.
But if by intuition we understand
not merely a sensuous material
but the objective totality,
then the intuition is an intellectual one, that is,
its subject matter is not existence in its externalization
but that element in existence which is
unalterable reality and truth;
the reality only in so far as it is essentially
in the concept and is determined by it;
the idea, of whose more precise nature more will be said later.
What intuition as such is supposed to have
over the concept is external reality,
the reality that lacks the concept
and receives value only through the concept.

Consequently, since the understanding exhibits
the infinite force that determines the universal,
or conversely, since it is the understanding
that through the form of universality
imparts stable subsistence to the otherwise
inherent instability of determinateness,
then it is not the fault of the understanding
if there is no further advance.
It is a subjective impotence of reason
that allows these determinacies to remain so dispersed,
and is unable to bring them back to their unity
through the dialectical force opposed
to that abstract universality,
that is to say, through the determinacies'
own nature which is their concept.
To be sure, the understanding does give them
through the form of abstract universality a rigidity of being,
so to speak, which they do not otherwise possess
in the qualitative sphere and in the sphere of reflection;
but by thus simplifying them, the understanding
at the same time quickens them with spirit,
and it so sharpens them that only at that point,
only there, do they also obtain the capacity
to dissolve themselves and to pass over into their opposite.
The ripest maturity, the highest stage,
that anything can attain is
the one at which its fall begins.
The fixity of the determinacies
which the understanding appears to run up against,
the form of the imperishable,
is that of self-referring universality.
But this universality belongs to the concept as its own,
and for this reason what is found expressed in it,
infinitely close at hand,
is the dissolution of the finite.
This universality directly contradicts
the determinateness of the finite
and makes explicit its disproportion
with respect to it.
Or rather, that disproportion is already at hand;
the abstract determinate is posited as
one with universality
and, for this reason, not for itself
(for it would then be only a determinate)
but, on the contrary,
only as the unity of itself and the universal,
that is, as concept.

Therefore the common practice
of separating understanding and reason
is to be rejected on all counts.
On the contrary, to consider the concept
as void of reason should itself be
considered as an incapacity of reason
to recognize itself in the concept.
The determinate and abstract concept is the condition,
or rather an essential moment, of reason;
it is form quickened by spirit in which the finite,
through the universality in which it refers to itself,
is internally kindled, is posited as dialectical
and thereby is the beginning of the appearance of reason.

Since in the foregoing the determinate concept
has been presented in its truth,
it is only left to indicate what, as so presented,
it has already been posited as.
Difference, which is an essential moment of the concept
but in the pure universal is not yet posited as such,
receives its due in the determinate concept.
Determinateness in the form of universality is
united with the latter to form a simple;
determinate universality is self-referring determinateness,
determinate determinateness,
or absolute negativity posited for itself.
But self-referring determinateness is singularity.
Just as universality immediately is
particularity in and for itself,
no less immediately is particularity also
singularity in and for itself;
this singularity is at first to be regarded as
the third moment of the concept,
inasmuch as it is held fast
in opposition to the other two,
but also as the absolute turning back
of the concept into itself,
and at the same time
as the posited loss of itself.
