
CHAPTER 3

The absolute relation

Absolute necessity is not so much the necessary,
even less a necessary, but necessity:
being simply as reflection.
It is relation because it is a distinguishing
whose moments are themselves
the whole totality of necessity,
and therefore subsist absolutely,
but do so in such a way that
their subsisting is one subsistence,
and the difference only the reflective shine of
the movement of exposition,
and this reflective shine is the absolute itself.
Essence as such is reflection or a shining;
as absolute relation, however, essence is the
reflective shine posited as reflective shine,
one which, as such self-referring, is absolute actuality.
The absolute, first expounded by external reflection,
as absolute form or as necessity now expounds itself;
this self-exposition is its self-positing,
and is only this self-positing.
Just as the light of nature is not a something,
nor is it a thing, but its being is rather only its shining,
so manifestation is self-identical absolute actuality.

The sides of the absolute relation
are not, therefore, attributes.
In the attribute the absolute reflectively shines
only in one of its moments,
as in a presupposition that
external reflection has simply assumed.
But the expositor of the absolute is the absolute necessity
which, as self-determining, is identical with itself.
Since this necessity is the reflective shining
posited as reflective shining, the sides of this relation,
because they are as shine, are totalities;
for as shine, the differences are
themselves and their opposite,
that is, they are the whole;
and, conversely, they thus are only shine
because they are totalities.
Thus this distinguishing,
this reflecting shining of the absolute,
is only the identical positing of itself.

This relation in its immediate concept is
the relation of substance and accidents,
the immediate internal disappearing and becoming
of the absolute reflective shine.
If substance determines itself as a being-for-itself over
against an other or is absolute relation as something real,
then we have the relation of causality.
Finally, when this last relation passes over into
reciprocal causality by referring itself to itself,
we then have the absolute relation also posited
in accordance with the determination it contains;
this posited unity of itself in its determinations,
which are posited as the whole itself
and consequently equally as determinations,
is then the concept.

A. THE RELATION OF SUBSTANTIALITY

Absolute necessity is absolute relation
because it is not being as such
but being that is because it is,
being as the absolute mediation
of itself with itself.
This being is substance;
as the final unity of essence and being,
it is the being in all being.
It is neither the unreflected immediate,
nor something abstract standing behind
concrete existence and appearance,
but the immediate actuality itself,
and it is this actuality
as being absolutely reflected into itself,
as a subsisting that exists in and for itself.
Substance, as this unity of being and reflection,
is essentially the shining and the positedness of itself.
The shining is a self-referring shining, thus it is;
this being is substance as such.
Conversely, this being is only the self-identical positedness,
and as such it is shining totality, accidentality.

This shining is identity as identity of form,
the unity of possibility and actuality.
It is becoming at first,
contingency as the sphere of
coming-to-be and passing-away;
for in the determination of immediacy
the connection of possibility and actuality is
the immediate conversion of the two
into each other as existents,
of each into its other as only an other to it.
But because being is shine,
their relation is also one of identical terms
or of terms shining in one another, that is, reflection.
The movement of accidentality, therefore,
exhibits in each of its moments the mutual
reflective shine of the categories of being
and of the reflective determinations of essence.
The immediate something has a content;
its immediacy is at the same time
reflected indifference towards the form.
This content is determinate,
and because this determinateness is one of being,
the something passes over into an other.
But quality is also a determinateness of reflection;
as such, it is indifferent diversity.
But this diversity is animated into opposition,
and returns to the ground which is the nothing,
but also immanent reflection.
This reflection sublates itself;
but it is itself also reflected in-itselfness:
so it is possibility, and this in-itselfness,
in its transition which is equally immanent reflection,
is necessary actuality.

This movement of accidentality is the actuosity of substance
as the tranquil coming forth of itself.
It is not active against something,
but only against itself as a simple unresisting element.
The sublating of a presupposition is the disappearing shine;
only in the act of sublating the immediate does this
immediate itself come to be, or is that shining;
the beginning that begins from itself is first of all
the positing of this itself from which the beginning is made.

Substance, as this identity of the reflective shining,
is the totality of the whole and embraces accidentality in itself,
and accidentality is the whole substance itself.
Its differentiation into the simple identity
of being and the flux of accidents
within it is one form of its shining.
That simple being is the formless substance of the imagination
for which the shine has not determined itself as shine,
but which holds on, as on an absolute,
to this indeterminate identity that has no truth
but only is the determinateness of immediate actuality,
or equally so of in-itselfness or possibility,
form determinations that fall into accidentality.
The other determination, the flux of accidents,
is the absolute form-unity of accidentality,
substance as absolute power.
The ceasing-to-be of the accident is
its return as actuality into itself,
as into its in-itself or into its possibility;
but this, its in-itself, is itself only a positedness
and therefore also actuality,
and because these form determinations are
equally determinations of content,
this possible is an actual differently determined
also according to content.
Substance manifests itself through the actuality,
with the content of the latter into which
it translates the possible, as creative power,
and, through the possibility to which
it reduces the actual, as destructive power;
the creating is destructive and the destructing creative,
for the negative and the positive, possibility and negativity
are in substantial necessity absolutely united.

The accidents as such, and there are several of them,
because plurality is one of the determinations of being,
have no power over each other.
They are the immediately existent something,
or the something that immediately exists for itself;
concretely existing things of manifold properties;
or wholes consisting of parts, self-subsisting parts;
forces in need of reciprocal solicitation
and conditioning each other.
In so far as such an accidental
being seems to exercise a power over an other,
that power is that of substance that
encompasses them both within itself
and, as negativity, posits an inequality of value:
one it determines as ceasing-to-be
and another as having a different content
and as coming-to-be,
the one as passing over into its possibility
and the other into actuality
accordingly ever dividing itself
into this difference of form and content
and ever purifying itself of this one-sidedness,
but in this purification ever falling back
into determination and division.
One accident thus drives out another
only because its own subsisting is
this very totality of form and content
into which it, as well as its other, equally perishes.

Because of this immediate identity and presence
of substance in the accidents,
there is still no real difference present.
In this first determination, substance is not yet manifested
according to its whole concept.
When substance, as self-identical being-in-and-for-itself,
is differentiated from itself as a totality of accidents,
it is substance itself, as power, that mediates the difference.
This power is necessity, the positive persistence
of the accidents in their negativity
and their mere positedness in their subsistence;
this middle is thus the unity of
substantiality and accidentality themselves,
a middle whose extremes have no subsistence of their own.
Substantiality is, therefore, only
the relation as immediately vanishing;
it refers to itself not as a negative
and, as the immediate unity of power with itself,
is in the form only of its identity,
not of its negative essence;
only one of its moments,
that of negativity or of difference,
vanishes altogether;
the other moment of identity does not.

Another way of considering the matter is this.

The shine or the accidentality is indeed
in itself substance by virtue of the power,
but is not thus posited as this self-identical shine;
and therefore substance has only the accidentality,
not itself, for its shape or positedness;
it is not substance as substance.
The relation of substantiality is at first, therefore, only this,
that substance manifests itself as a formal power
whose differences are not substantial;
in fact, substance only is as the inner of the accidents,
and these only are in the substance.
Or this relation is only the shining of totality as becoming;
but it is equally reflection and, for this reason,
the accidentality which substance is in itself is also posited as such;
it is thus determined as self-referring negativity over against itself,
determined as self-referring simple identity with itself;
and it is substance that exists in and for itself,
substance endowed with power.
Thus the relation of substantiality passes over
into the relation of causality.

B. THE RELATION OF CAUSALITY

Substance is power, power reflected into itself,
not transitive power but power that posits determinations
and distinguishes them from itself.
As self-referring in its determining,
it is itself that which it posits as a negative
or makes into a positedness.
This positedness is, as such, sublated substantiality,
the merely posited, the effect;
the substance that exists for itself is, however, cause.

This relation of causality is in the first place
only this relation of cause and effect;
as such, it is the formal relation of causality.

a. Formal causality

1. Cause is originative as against the effect.
As power, substance is the reflective shining,
or it has accidentality.
But in this shining, as power,
it equally is an immanent reflection;
it thus expounds its transition,
and this reflective shine is
determined as reflective shine,
or the accident is posited
as being just this, something posited.
But in its determining substance
does not proceed from accidentality,
as if the latter were an other beforehand
and were determined as determinateness only then,
but the two are one actuosity.
Substance as power determines itself;
but this determining is immediately itself
the sublation of the determining and a turning back.
It determines itself: substance, that which determines, is
thus the immediate and that which is itself already determined;
in determining itself it therefore posits
the already determined as determined;
and thus it has sublated the
positedness and has returned into itself.
Conversely, because this turning back is
the negative reference of substance to itself,
it is itself a determining
or the repelling of itself from itself;
it is through this turning back that
the determinate comes to be from which
substance seems to begin
and now to posit as something
which it has found already determined.
Absolute actuosity is thus cause,
the power of substance in its truth
as the manifestation by which
that which is in itself,
the accident or the positedness,
is immediately expounded in its becoming,
is posited as positedness, as effect.
This effect is, therefore, first the same as
what the accidentality of the relation
of substance is, namely substance as positedness;
but, second, an accident
is substantially such only by vanishing, only as transient;
but as effect it is positedness as self-identical;
in the effect the cause is manifested as the whole substance,
that is to say, as reflected into itself
in the positedness itself as such.

2. Over against this positedness reflected into itself,
this determined as determined,
there stands substance as the non-posited original.
Because substance is as absolute power
a turning back into itself,
yet this turning back is itself a determining,
it is no longer the mere in-itself of its accident
but is also posited as this in-itself.
Substance has actuality, therefore, only as cause.
But this actuality in which its in-itself,
its determinateness in the relation of substantiality,
is now posited as determinateness, is effect;
therefore substance has the actuality
which it has as cause only in its effect.
This is the necessity which is cause.
It is actual substance,
because as power substance determines itself;
but it is at the same time cause,
because it expounds this determinateness
or posits it as positedness
and thus posits its actuality
as positedness or effect.
This is the other of cause,
the positedness as against the original
and as mediated through it.
But cause, as necessity,
equally sublates this mediating and,
in determining itself as the originally
self-referring term, as against the mediated,
turns back to itself;
for positedness is determined as positedness,
and consequently as self-identical;
therefore, cause is truly actual and self-identical
only in its effect.
The effect is therefore necessary,
because it is the manifestation of the cause
or is this necessity which the cause is.
Only as this necessity is cause self-moving,
self-initiating without being solicited by another,
self-subsisting source of production out of itself;
it must effect;
its originariness is this,
that it is because its immanent reflection
is a positing that determines and conversely;
the two are one unity.

Consequently, an effect contains nothing whatever
that the cause does not contain.
Conversely, a cause contains nothing
that is not in its effect.
A cause is cause only to the extent
that it produces an effect;
to be cause is nothing but
this determination of having an effect,
and to be effect is nothing but
this determination of having a cause.
Cause as such entails its effect,
and the effect entails the cause;
in so far as a cause has not acted yet
or has ceased to act,
it is not a cause;
and the effect, in so far as
its cause is no longer present,
is no longer an effect
but an indifferent actuality.

3. Now in this identity of cause and effect
the form distinguishing them respectively,
as that which exists in itself
and that which is posited,
is sublated.
The cause is extinguished in its effect
and the effect too is thereby extinguished,
for it only is the determinateness of the cause.
Hence this causality which has been extinguished
in the effect is an immediacy
which is indifferent to the relation of cause and effect
and comes to it externally.

b. The determinate relation of causality

1. The self-identity of cause in its effect is
the sublation of its power and negativity,
hence a unity which is indifferent
to differences of form,
that is to say, content.
This content, therefore, refers to form
(here causality) only implicitly.
The two are thus posited as diverse,
and with respect to content the form is itself
a causality which is only immediately efficient,
a contingent causality.

Further, the content is as thus determined
an internally diversified content;
and the cause is determined in accordance with its content,
and so is therefore also the effect.
The content, since reflectedness here
is also immediate actuality,
is to this extent actual,
but finite, substance.

This is now the relation of causality
in its reality and finitude.
As formal, it is the infinite relation of absolute power,
the content of which is pure manifestation or necessity.
As finite causality, on the contrary,
it has a given content
and, as an external difference,
it runs its course here and there over it,
this identical content which in its determination
is one and the same substance.

Because of this identity of content,
this causality is an analytic proposition.
It is the same fact that comes up once as cause
and then again as effect,
in one case as something subsisting on its own
and in the other as positedness or determination.
Since these determinations of form
are an external reflection,
it is up to the essentially tautological
consideration of a subjective understanding
to determine an appearance as effect
and to rise from it to its cause
in order to comprehend and explain it.
The same content is being repeated;
there is nothing else in the cause
which is not in the effect.
For instance, rain is the cause of
wetness which is its effect;
“the rain makes wet,”
this is an analytical proposition;
the same water which is rain is wetness;
as rain, this water is only in
the form of a subject by itself;
as wetness or moisture, it is
on the contrary in adjectival form,
something posited no longer meant to have a subsistence on its own;
and the one determination, just like the other, is external to water.
Again, the cause of this color is a coloring agent,
a pigment which is one and the same actuality,
once in the form of an agent external to it,
that is, is externally linked to an agent different from it;
but again in the determination, equally external
to it, of an effect.
The cause of an act is the inner intention of
the subject who is the agent,
and this intention is the same in content and value
as the existence which it attains through the action.
If the movement of a body is considered as effect,
the cause of this effect is then a propulsive force;
but it is the same quantum of movement
which is present before and after the propulsion,
the same concrete existence which the propulsive body
contained and which it communicated to the one propelled;
and what it communicated, it lost in equal measure.

The cause, say the painter or the propulsive body,
does have yet another content than,
in the case of the painter,
the colors and the form combining
these into a painting;
and, in the other case,
the movement of specific strength and direction.
But this further content is a contingent side-being
which has nothing to do with the cause;
whatever other qualities the painter
might possess besides being the painter of this painting,
this does not enter into the painting;
only those of his properties
which are displayed in the effect
are present in him as cause;
as for the rest, he is not a cause.
Likewise, whether the propulsive body is
of stone or wood, green, yellow, and so on,
all this does not enter into its propulsion
and, to this extent, is not a cause.

It is worth noting in regard to
this tautology of the relation of causality
that the tautology does not seem to occur
whenever it is not the proximate,
but the remote cause which is at issue.
The alteration of form
which the basic fact undergoes
as it passes through several middle terms
hides the identity which it preserves across them.
In this proliferation of causes
introduced between it and the last effect,
that fact is linked to other things
and circumstances,
so that it is not that first term,
which is declared the cause,
but all these several causes together,
that contain the complete effect.

For instance, if a man developed his talents
in circumstances due to the loss of his father
who was hit by a bullet in battle, then this shot
(or still further back,
the war or some cause of the war,
and on to infinity)
could be adduced as the cause of the man's skillfulness.
But it is clear that the shot, for one,
is not the cause by itself
but only in conjunction with the
other efficient determinations.
Or more precisely, the shot is not the cause at all,
but only a single moment that pertained to
the circumstances of the possibility.

But it is the inadmissible application of
the relation of causality to the relations of
physico-organic and spiritual life that must be noted above all.
Here that which is called the cause does indeed show itself
to be of a different content than the effect,
but this is because anything that has an effect on
a living thing is independently determined,
altered, and transmuted by the latter,
for the living thing will not let
the cause come to its effect,
that is, it sublates it as cause.
Thus it is inadmissible to say that
nourishment is the cause of blood,
or that such and such a dish, or chill and humidity,
are the causes of fever or of what have you;
it is equally inadmissible to give the Ionic climate
as the cause of Homer's works,
or Caesar's ambition as the cause of
the fall of Rome's republican constitution.
In history in general there are indeed
spiritual masses and individuals
at play and influencing each other;
but it is of the nature of spirit,
in a much higher sense than it is of
the character of living things,
that it will not admit another
originative principle within itself,
or that it will not let a cause
continue to work its causality in it undisturbed
but will rather interrupt and transmute it.
But these relations belong to the idea,
and will come up for discussion then.
This much can still be noted here,
namely that in so far as the relation of cause
and effect is admitted,
albeit in an inappropriate sense,
the effect cannot be greater than the cause.
It has become a common witticism in history
to let great effects arise from small causes
and to cite as the first cause of an event
of far-reaching and profound consequence an anecdote.
Any such so-called first cause is to be regarded
as no more than an occasion, an external stimulus,
of which the inner spirit of the event had no need,
or could have used a countless number of others,
in order to make its first appearance,
to give itself a first breath and announce itself.
The converse is rather the case.
It is by the spirit that any such
triviality and contingency is determined
in the first place to be the occasion of spirit.
Historical arabesques that draw a full-blown figure
out of a slender stalk are no doubt an ingenious,
but highly superficial, practice.
It is true that in the rise of the great out of the small
we witness everywhere the conversion
that spirit works on the external;
but precisely for this reason
the external is not the cause within spirit;
rather, that conversion itself sublates the relation of causality.

2. But this determinateness of the relation of causality,
that content and form are different
and indifferent to each other,
extends further.
The determination of form is also content determination;
cause and effect, the two sides of the relation,
are therefore also another content.
Or the content, because it is only as the content of a form,
has the difference of this form within it
and is essentially different.
But this form of the content is the
relation of causality,
which is a content identical
in cause and the effect,
and consequently the different content is externally connected,
on the one hand with the cause
and on the other with the effect;
hence the content itself does not enter into
the effective action and into the relation.
This external content is therefore relationless,
an immediate concrete existence,
or because it is as content
the implicit identity of cause and effect,
it is also immediate, existent identity.
This content is, therefore, anything at all
which has manifold determinations of its existence,
among them also this, that it is
in some respect or other cause or also effect.
In it, the form determinations of cause and effect
have their substrate, that is to say,
their essential subsistence
and each has a particular subsistence
(since their identity is their subsistence);
but it is a subsistence which is at the same time immediate,
not their subsistence as unity of form or as relation.
But this thing is not only substrate but also substance,
for it is identical subsistence only as subsistence of the relation.
Moreover, the substance is finite substance,
for it is determined as immediate over against its causality.
But it has causality at the same time,
for it is just as much an identity as this relation.
Now this substrate is, as cause,
negative reference to itself.
But this “itself” to which it refers is,
first, a positedness because it is determined as immediately actual;
this positedness, as content, is any determination whatever.
Second, causality is external to the substrate
and itself constitutes, therefore, its positedness.
Now since it is causal substance,
its causality consists in negatively referring itself to itself,
hence to its positedness and external causality.
The effective action of this substance thus
begins from something external,
frees itself from this external determination,
and its turning back into itself is
the preservation of its immediate concrete existence
and the sublation of the one which is posited,
and consequently of its causality as such.

Take a stone that moves. It is a cause.
Its movement is a determination which it has.
But, besides it, it contains yet many other determinations
(color, shape, and so on)
that do not enter into its causality.
Because its immediate concrete existence is
separated from its form-connection,
namely the form of causality,
the latter is something external;
the stone's movement and the causality attaching to it
is in it only positedness.
But the causality of the stone is also the stone's own causality,
as follows from the fact that its substantial subsistence is
the stone's identical self-reference,
but that this is now determined as positedness
and is therefore at the same time negative self-reference.
Its causality, which is directed against itself as
a positedness or as an externality,
consists therefore in sublating this
and through its removal in returning to itself,
to this extent, therefore, in not
being self-identical in its positedness
but only in restoring its originariness.
Or again, rain is the cause of wetness,
which is the same water as the rain.
This water has the determination of being rain and cause
because this determination has been posited in it by another;
another force, or what have you, has lifted it into the air
and compressed it into a mass, the weight of which makes it fall.
Its being removed from the earth is
a determination alien to its original self-identity, to its gravity;
its causality consists in removing such determination
and in restoring its original identity;
but this means also sublating its causality.

We now consider the second determinateness of causality
which concerns form;
this relation is causality external to itself,
as the originariness which is
within just as much positedness or effect.
This union of opposite determination
in an existent substrate constitutes
the infinite regress from cause to cause.
We start from an effect;
the latter has as effect a cause;
but this cause has a cause in turn, and so on.
Why does the cause have a cause in turn?
That is to say, why is the same side
which was previously determined as cause
now determined as effect
and therefore demands a new cause?

Because the cause is something finite,
a determinate in general;
determined as one moment of the form
as against the effect;
so it has its determinateness or negation outside it;
but for this very reason it is itself finite,
has its determinateness within it
and is thereby positedness or effect.
Its identity as this positedness is also posited,
but it is a third term, the immediate substrate;
causality is therefore external to itself,
because its originariness is here an immediacy.
The difference of form is therefore
a first determinateness,
not yet determinateness posited as determinateness;
it is existent otherness.
Finite reflection, on the one hand,
stops short at this immediate,
removes the unity of form from it
and makes it be cause in one respect
and effect in another;
on the other hand, it transfers
the unity of form into the infinite,
and through the endless progression
expresses its impotence in attaining
and holding fast to this unity.

Exactly the same is the case of the effect,
or rather the endless progression from effect to effect
is one and the same as  the regression from cause to cause.
Just as in the latter a cause becomes an effect
which has another cause in turn,
so too, conversely, the effect becomes a cause
which has another effect in turn.
The determinate cause under consideration
begins from an externality
and returns in its effect back to itself,
but not as cause;
on the contrary, it loses its causality in that process.
But, conversely, the effect arrives at
a substrate which is substance,
an original self-referring subsistence;
in it, therefore, that positedness becomes a positedness,
that is to say, this substance, as the effect is posited in it,
behaves as cause.
But that first effect, the positedness
that accrues to the substance externally,
is other than the second which the substance produces;
for this second effect is determined as
the immanent reflection of substance
whereas the first is in it as an externality.
But because causality is here causality external to itself,
it also equally fails to return in its effect back to itself
but becomes therein external to itself;
its effect becomes again a positedness in a substrate;
as in another substance which however
equally makes this positedness into positedness,
in other words, manifests itself as cause,
again repels its effect from itself,
and so on, into bad infinity.

3. We now have to see what has resulted from
the movement of determinate causality.
Formal causality expires in the effect
and the element of identity of
these two moments emerges as a result,
but it does so only as an implicit unity of
cause and effect to which the form connection is external.
For this reason, the element of identity is immediate also
with respect to both of the two determinations of immediacy,
first as in-itself,
as a content on which causality is deployed externally;
second, as a concrete existent substrate
in which cause and effect inhere
as different determinations of form.
In this substrate, the two determinations are implicitly one,
but, on account of this implicitness
or of the externality of form,
each is external to itself
and hence, in its unity with the other,
is also determined as other with respect to it.
Consequently, the cause has indeed an effect
and is at the same time itself effect;
and the effect not only has a cause
but is itself also cause.
But the effect which the cause has,
and the effect which it is,
are different;
as are also the cause which the effect has
and the cause which it is.

The outcome of the movement of the
determinate relation of causality is then this,
that the cause does not just expire in the effect,
and thereby the effect as well, as in formal causality,
but that by expiring in the effect
the cause comes to be again;
that the effect vanishes in the cause,
but equally comes to be again in it.
Each of these determinations
sublates itself in its positing,
and posits itself in its sublating;
what we have is not an external
transition of causality from one substrate to another,
but its becoming-other is at the same time its own positing.
Causality thus pre-supposes itself or conditions itself.
The previously only implicit identity, the substrate,
is therefore now determined as presupposition
or posited as against the efficient causality,
and the reflection hitherto only external to
the identity is now in relation to it.

c. Action and reaction

Causality is a presupposing activity.
The cause is conditioned;
it is a negative reference
to itself as a presupposed,
as an external other which in itself,
but only in itself, is causality itself.
This other is, as we have seen,
the substantial identity into which
formal causality passes over,
which now has determined itself
as against this causality as its negative.
Or it is the same as the substance
of the causal relation,
but a substance which is confronted by
the power of accidentality
as itself substantial activity.
It is the passive substance.
Passive is that which is immediate,
or which exists-in-itself
but is not also for itself;
pure being or essence in just
this determinateness of abstract self-identity.
Confronting the passive substance is
the negatively self-referring substance,
the efficient substance.
It is cause inasmuch as in determinate causality
it has restored itself out of the effect
through the negation of itself;
a reflected being which in its otherness
or as an immediate behaves essentially
as a positing activity
and through its negation mediates itself.
Here, therefore, causality no longer has
a substrate in which it inheres;
it is not a determination of form
as against this identity
but is itself substance,
or in other words, causality alone is at the origin.
The substrate is the passive substance
which causality has presupposed for itself.

This cause now acts,
for it is the negative power over itself;
at the same time it is its own presupposition;
thus it acts upon itself as upon an other,
upon the passive substance.
Hence, it first sublates
the otherness of this substance
and returns in it back to itself;
second, it determines this same substance,
posits this sublation of its otherness
or the substance's turning back into itself
as a determinateness.
This positedness, because it is at the same time
the substance's turning back into itself,
is at first its effect.
But conversely, because as presupposing
it determines itself as its other,
it then posits the effect in this other,
in the passive substance.
Or again, because the passive substance is itself this double,
namely a self-subsistent other,
and at the same time something presupposed
and already implicitly identical
with the efficient cause;
because of this, the action of the passive
substance is therefore itself double.
It is at once both the sublation of its determinateness,
namely of its condition,
or the sublation of the self-subsistence
of the passive substance;
and also, in sublating its identity as
it sublates this substance,
the pre-supposing of itself,
that is, the positing or supposing of itself as other.
Through this last moment,
the passive substance is preserved;
that first sublation of it appears in this respect
at the same time also in this way,
namely that only some determinations are sublated in it,
and its identity in the effect
with the efficient cause
occurs in it externally.

To this extent it suffers violence.
Violence is the appearance of power,
or power as external.
But power is something external only in so far as in its
action, that is, in the positing of itself,
the causal substance is at the same
time a presupposing, that is, posits itself as sublated.
Conversely, the act of
violence is therefore equally an act of power.
The violent cause acts only on
an other which it presupposes;
its effect on it is its negative self-reference,
or the manifestation of itself.
The passive is the self-subsistent
which is only a posited,
something internally fractured
an actuality which is condition,
though a condition that now is in its truth
as an actuality that is only a possible,
or, conversely, an in-itself that is only
the determinateness of the in-itself,
is only passive.
To that which suffers violence, therefore,
not only is it possible to do violence,
but violence must be done to it;
that which has dominion over an other,
only has it because its power is that of the other,
a power which in that dominion
manifests both itself and the other.
Through violence the passive substance
is only posited as what it is in truth,
namely, that because it is
the simple positive or the immediate substance,
for that very reason it is only something posited;
the “pre-” that it has as condition is
the reflective shine of immediacy
that the efficient causality strips off from it.

Passive substance, therefore, is only given its due
by the action on it of another power.
What it loses is the immediacy it had,
the substantiality alien to it.
What comes to it as an alien something,
namely that it is determined as a positedness,
is its own determination.
But now in being determined in its positedness,
or in its own determination,
the result is that it is not sublated
but rather that it only rejoins itself
and in its being determined is,
therefore, an originariness.
On the one hand, therefore,
the passive substance is preserved
or posited by the active,
namely in so far as the latter sublates itself;
but, on the other hand, it is the act of
the passive substance itself to rejoin itself
and thus to make itself into
what is originary and a cause.
The being posited by an other
and its own becoming
are one and the same.

Now, because the passive substance has been converted into a cause,
it follows, first, that the effect is sublated in it;
therein consists its reaction in general.
As passive substance, it is in itself as positedness;
also, positedness has been posited in it by the other substance,
namely in so far as it received its effect within it.
Its reaction contains, therefore, a twofold aspect.
For one, what it is in itself is posited.
And two, what it is as posited
displays itself as its in-itself;
it is positedness in itself,
hence through the other substance it
receives an effect within;
but, conversely, this positedness is
its own in-itself,
it is thus its own effect,
it itself displays itself as a cause.

Second, the reaction is directed at
the first efficient cause.
For the effect which the hitherto
passive substance sublates within itself
is precisely the effect of that other cause.
But a cause has its substantial actuality only in its effect;
inasmuch as this effect is sublated,
so is also the causal substantiality of the other cause.
This happens first in itself through itself, in that
the cause makes itself into an effect;
its negative determination disappears
in this identity and the cause becomes passive;
and, second, it happens through the hitherto passive,
but now reacting substance,
which sublates its effect.

Now in determinate causality
the substance acted upon becomes a cause,
for it acts against the positing of an effect in it.
But it did not react against the cause of that effect
but posited its effect rather in another substance,
and thus there arose the progression to infinity of effects;
for here the cause is only implicitly
identical with itself in the effect,
and hence, on the one hand,
it expires into an immediate identity
as it comes to rest,
but, on the other hand,
it revives in another substance.
In conditioned causality, on the contrary,
the cause refers back to itself in the effect,
for the latter is as a condition,
as a presupposition, its other,
and its act is therefore just as much a becoming
as a positing and sublating of the other.

Further, causality behaves in all this as passive substance;
but, as we have seen, the latter becomes causal
through the effect it incurs.
That first cause, the one which acts first
and receives its effect back into itself as a reaction,
thus comes up again as a cause,
whereby the activity which in finite causality
runs into the bad infinite progression
is bent around and becomes an action
that returns to itself,
an infinite reciprocal action.

C. RECIPROCITY OF ACTION

In finite causality it is substances
that actively relate to each other.
Mechanism consists in this externality of causality,
where the cause's reflection in its effect into itself
is at the same time a repelling being,
or where, in the self-identity which
the causal substance has in its effect,
the substance is equally immediately external to itself
and the effect is transposed into another substance.
In reciprocity of action this mechanism is now sublated,
for it contains first the disappearing of
that original persistence of immediate substantiality;
second, the coming to be of the cause,
and hence originariness mediating
itself with itself through its negation.

At first, the reciprocity of action takes on
the form of a reciprocal causality of substances
that are presupposed and that condition each other;
each is with respect to the other
both active and passive substance.
Since the two are thus passive and active at once,
their difference is thereby already sublated;
it is a totally transparent reflective shine;
they are substances only in being
the identity of the active and the passive.
The reciprocity of action is itself,
therefore, only a still empty way and manner,
and all that is still needed is merely
the external bringing together of what is already there,
both in itself and as posited.
First of all, it is no longer substrates
that are referred to each other but substances;
in the movement of conditional causality,
the still left over presupposed immediacy has been sublated,
and what conditions the causing activity is only an influence,
or its own passivity.
But this influence, moreover, does not come from
another substance originating it
but from precisely a causality
which is conditioned by influence,
or one which is mediated.
This at first external factor that accrues to the cause
and constitutes the side of its passivity is
therefore mediated through the causality itself,
is produced through its own activity
and is, consequently, a passivity
posited by its own very activity.
Causality is conditioned and conditioning.
As conditioning, it is passive;
but it is equally so as conditioned.
This conditioning or passivity is
the negation of the cause through itself
in that it makes itself essentially into an effect
and is cause precisely for that reason.
Reciprocity of action is, therefore, only causality itself;
the cause does not just have an effect
but, in the effect, refers as cause back to itself.

Causality has thereby returned to its absolute concept
and has at the same time attained the concept itself.
At first, it is real necessity, absolute self-identity
in which the difference between itand the determinations
referring to each other within it are substances,
free actualities, over against one another.
Necessity is in this way inner identity;
causality is the manifestation of it
in which its reflective shine of
substantial otherness has been sublated,
and necessity is elevated to freedom.
In the reciprocity of action,
originative causality displays itself
as arising from its negation, from passivity,
and as passing away into it, as a becoming,
but in such a way that this becoming is
at the same time equally only shining;
the transition into otherness is reflection-into-itself;
negation, which is the ground of the cause,
is its positive rejoining with itself.

In the reciprocity of action, therefore,
necessity and causality have disappeared;
they contain both the immediate identity
as combination and reference
and the absolute substantiality of the differences,
consequently their contingency,
the original unity of substantial difference
and therefore the absolute contradiction.
Necessity is being, because being is;
it is the unity of being with itself
that has itself as ground, but, conversely,
because this being has a ground, it is not being;
it is simply and solely reflective shining, reference or mediation.
Causality is this posited transition of original being,
of cause, into reflective shine or mere positedness,
and, conversely, of positedness into originariness;
but the identity itself of being and reflective shine
still is the inner necessity.
This inwardness or this in-itself sublates
the movement of causality;
the result is that the substantiality of the sides
that stand in relation is lost, and necessity unveils itself.
Necessity does not come to be freedom by vanishing
but in that its still only inner identity is manifested,
and this manifestation is the identical movement immanent to
the different sides,
the immanent reflection of shine as shine.
Conversely, contingency thereby
comes to be freedom at the same time,
for the sides of necessity,
which have the shape of independent, free actualities
that do not reflectively shine into each other,
are now posited as an identity,
so that now these totalities of immanent reflection,
in their differences, also shine as identical,
in other words, they are also posited as
only one and the same reflection.

No longer, therefore, does absolute substance
as self-differentiating absolute form
repel itself as necessity from itself,
nor does it fall apart as contingency
into indifferent, external substances,
but, on the contrary, it differentiates itself:
on the one hand, into the totality
(the heretofore passive substance)
which is at the origin,
as the reflection from internal determinateness,
as simple whole that contains its positedness within itself
and in this positedness is posited as self-identical;
this is the universal;
on the other hand, into the totality
(the hitherto causal substance)
which is the reflection,
equally from internal determinateness,
into the negative determinateness
which, just as the self-identical determinateness,
equally is the whole,
but posited as the self-identical negativity;
the singular.
But, because the universal is self-identical
only in that the determinateness that it holds within is sublated,
hence it is the negative as negative,
it immediately is the same negativity that singularity is.
And the singularity, because it equally is
the determinedly determined, the negative as negative,
immediately is the same identity that universality is.
This, their simple identity, is the particularity that,
from the singular, holds the moment of determinateness;
from the universal, that of immanent reflection,
the two in immediate unity.
These three totalities are therefore one and the same reflection
that, as negative self-reference, differentiates itself
into the other two totalities;
but as into a perfectly transparent difference,
namely into the determinate simplicity,
or into the simple determinateness,
which is their one same identity.
This is the concept,
the realm of subjectivity or of freedom.

