                                                                  1.5
      8
  Y




                                                                  1.0
      6




                                                                  0.5
      4
      2




                                                                  0.0
           0   20   40       60   80   100                              2   5        10       20

                         X                                                      Flexibility


FIGURE 2.9. Left: Data simulated from f , shown in black. Three estimates of
f are shown: the linear regression line (orange curve), and two smoothing spline
fits (blue and green curves). Right: Training MSE (grey curve), test MSE (red
curve), and minimum possible test MSE over all methods (dashed line). Squares
represent the training and test MSEs for the three fits shown in the left-hand
panel.

If these are approximately equal to y1 , y2 , . . . , yn , then the training MSE
given by (2.5) is small. However, we are really not interested in whether
fˆ(xi ) ≈ yi ; instead, we want to know whether fˆ(x0 ) is approximately equal
to y0 , where (x0 , y0 ) is a previously unseen test observation not used to train
the statistical learning method. We want to choose the method that gives
the lowest test MSE, as opposed to the lowest training MSE. In other words,
                                                                                   test MSE
if we had a large number of test observations, we could compute
                                  Ave(y0 − fˆ(x0 ))2 ,                       (2.6)
the average squared prediction error for these test observations (x0 , y0 ).
We’d like to select the model for which this quantity is as small as possible.
   How can we go about trying to select a method that minimizes the test
MSE? In some settings, we may have a test data set available—that is,
we may have access to a set of observations that were not used to train
the statistical learning method. We can then simply evaluate (2.6) on the
test observations, and select the learning method for which the test MSE is
smallest. But what if no test observations are available? In that case, one
might imagine simply selecting a statistical learning method that minimizes
the training MSE (2.5). This seems like it might be a sensible approach,
since the training MSE and the test MSE appear to be closely related.
Unfortunately, there is a fundamental problem with this strategy: there
is no guarantee that the method with the lowest training MSE will also
have the lowest test MSE. Roughly speaking, the problem is that many
statistical methods specifically estimate coefficients so as to minimize the
training set MSE. For these methods, the training set MSE can be quite
small, but the test MSE is often much larger.
   Figure 2.9 illustrates this phenomenon on a simple example. In the left-
hand panel of Figure 2.9, we have generated observations from (2.1) with
30     2. Statistical Learning

the true f given by the black curve. The orange, blue and green curves illus-
trate three possible estimates for f obtained using methods with increasing
levels of flexibility. The orange line is the linear regression fit, which is rela-
tively inflexible. The blue and green curves were produced using smoothing
splines, discussed in Chapter 7, with different levels of smoothness. It is
                                                                                    smoothing
clear that as the level of flexibility increases, the curves fit the observed spline
data more closely. The green curve is the most flexible and matches the
data very well; however, we observe that it fits the true f (shown in black)
poorly because it is too wiggly. By adjusting the level of flexibility of the
smoothing spline fit, we can produce many different fits to this data.
   We now move on to the right-hand panel of Figure 2.9. The grey curve
displays the average training MSE as a function of flexibility, or more
formally the degrees of freedom, for a number of smoothing splines. The
                                                                                    degrees of
degrees of freedom is a quantity that summarizes the flexibility of a curve; freedom
it is discussed more fully in Chapter 7. The orange, blue and green squares
indicate the MSEs associated with the corresponding curves in the left-
hand panel. A more restricted and hence smoother curve has fewer degrees
of freedom than a wiggly curve—note that in Figure 2.9, linear regression
is at the most restrictive end, with two degrees of freedom. The training
MSE declines monotonically as flexibility increases. In this example the
true f is non-linear, and so the orange linear fit is not flexible enough to
estimate f well. The green curve has the lowest training MSE of all three
methods, since it corresponds to the most flexible of the three curves fit in
the left-hand panel.
   In this example, we know the true function f , and so we can also com-
pute the test MSE over a very large test set, as a function of flexibility. (Of
course, in general f is unknown, so this will not be possible.) The test MSE
is displayed using the red curve in the right-hand panel of Figure 2.9. As
with the training MSE, the test MSE initially declines as the level of flex-
ibility increases. However, at some point the test MSE levels off and then
starts to increase again. Consequently, the orange and green curves both
have high test MSE. The blue curve minimizes the test MSE, which should
not be surprising given that visually it appears to estimate f the best in the
left-hand panel of Figure 2.9. The horizontal dashed line indicates Var("),
the irreducible error in (2.3), which corresponds to the lowest achievable
test MSE among all possible methods. Hence, the smoothing spline repre-
sented by the blue curve is close to optimal.
   In the right-hand panel of Figure 2.9, as the flexibility of the statistical
learning method increases, we observe a monotone decrease in the training
MSE and a U-shape in the test MSE. This is a fundamental property of
statistical learning that holds regardless of the particular data set at hand
and regardless of the statistical method being used. As model flexibility
increases, the training MSE will decrease, but the test MSE may not. When
a given method yields a small training MSE but a large test MSE, we are
said to be overfitting the data. This happens because our statistical learning
procedure is working too hard to find patterns in the training data, and
may be picking up some patterns that are just caused by random chance
rather than by true properties of the unknown function f . When we overfit
the training data, the test MSE will be very large because the supposed
                                                            2.2 Assessing Model Accuracy            31




                                                                   2.5
      12




                                                                   2.0
      10




                                              Mean Squared Error

                                                                   1.5
      8
  Y




                                                                   1.0
      6




                                                                   0.5
      4
      2




                                                                   0.0
           0    20   40       60   80   100                              2   5        10       20

                          X                                                      Flexibility



FIGURE 2.10. Details are as in Figure 2.9, using a different true f that is
much closer to linear. In this setting, linear regression provides a very good fit to
the data.

patterns that the method found in the training data simply don’t exist
in the test data. Note that regardless of whether or not overfitting has
occurred, we almost always expect the training MSE to be smaller than
the test MSE because most statistical learning methods either directly or
indirectly seek to minimize the training MSE. Overfitting refers specifically
to the case in which a less flexible model would have yielded a smaller
test MSE.
  Figure 2.10 provides another example in which the true f is approxi-
mately linear. Again we observe that the training MSE decreases mono-
tonically as the model flexibility increases, and that there is a U-shape in
the test MSE. However, because the truth is close to linear, the test MSE
only decreases slightly before increasing again, so that the orange least
squares fit is substantially better than the highly flexible green curve. Fi-
nally, Figure 2.11 displays an example in which f is highly non-linear. The
training and test MSE curves still exhibit the same general patterns, but
now there is a rapid decrease in both curves before the test MSE starts to
increase slowly.
  In practice, one can usually compute the training MSE with relative
ease, but estimating the test MSE is considerably more difficult because
usually no test data are available. As the previous three examples illustrate,
the flexibility level corresponding to the model with the minimal test MSE
can vary considerably among data sets. Throughout this book, we discuss a
variety of approaches that can be used in practice to estimate this minimum
point. One important method is cross-validation (Chapter 5), which is a cross-
method for estimating the test MSE using the training data.                    validation



2.2.2      The Bias-Variance Trade-Off
The U-shape observed in the test MSE curves (Figures 2.9–2.11) turns out
to be the result of two competing properties of statistical learning methods.
32      2. Statistical Learning




                                                                   20
      20




                                                                   15
                                              Mean Squared Error
      10




                                                                   10
  Y

      0




                                                                   5
      −10




                                                                   0
            0   20   40       60   80   100                             2   5        10       20

                          X                                                     Flexibility


FIGURE 2.11. Details are as in Figure 2.9, using a different f that is far from
linear. In this setting, linear regression provides a very poor fit to the data.

Though the mathematical proof is beyond the scope of this book, it is
possible to show that the expected test MSE, for a given value x0 , can
always be decomposed into the sum of three fundamental quantities: the
variance of fˆ(x0 ), the squared bias of fˆ(x0 ) and the variance of the error
                                                                               variance
terms ". That is,                                                              bias
         1             22
      E y0 − fˆ(x0 ) = Var(fˆ(x0 )) + [Bias(fˆ(x0 ))]2 + Var(").         (2.7)
                      1          22
Here the notation E y0 − fˆ(x0 ) defines the expected test MSE at x0 ,
                                                                               expected
and refers to the average test MSE that we would obtain if we repeatedly test MSE
estimated f using a large number of training sets, and tested each at x0 . The
                                                               1            22
overall expected test MSE can be computed by averaging E y0 − fˆ(x0 )
over all possible values of x0 in the test set.
  Equation 2.7 tells us that in order to minimize the expected test error,
we need to select a statistical learning method that simultaneously achieves
low variance and low bias. Note that variance is inherently a nonnegative
quantity, and squared bias is also nonnegative. Hence, we see that the
expected test MSE can never lie below Var("), the irreducible error from
(2.3).
  What do we mean by the variance and bias of a statistical learning
method? Variance refers to the amount by which fˆ would change if we
estimated it using a different training data set. Since the training data
are used to fit the statistical learning method, different training data sets
will result in a different fˆ. But ideally the estimate for f should not vary
too much between training sets. However, if a method has high variance
then small changes in the training data can result in large changes in fˆ. In
general, more flexible statistical methods have higher variance. Consider the
green and orange curves in Figure 2.9. The flexible green curve is following
the observations very closely. It has high variance because changing any
one of these data points may cause the estimate fˆ to change considerably.
                                                          2.2 Assessing Model Accuracy                  33




 2.5




                                  2.5




                                                                      20
                                                                                                      MSE
                                                                                                      Bias
                                                                                                      Var


 2.0




                                  2.0




                                                                      15
 1.5




                                  1.5




                                                                      10
 1.0




                                  1.0




                                                                      5
 0.5




                                  0.5
 0.0




                                  0.0




                                                                      0
       2   5        10       20         2   5        10       20           2   5        10       20

               Flexibility                      Flexibility                        Flexibility



FIGURE 2.12. Squared bias (blue curve), variance (orange curve), Var(!)
(dashed line), and test MSE (red curve) for the three data sets in Figures 2.9–2.11.
The vertical dotted line indicates the flexibility level corresponding to the smallest
test MSE.

In contrast, the orange least squares line is relatively inflexible and has low
variance, because moving any single observation will likely cause only a
small shift in the position of the line.
   On the other hand, bias refers to the error that is introduced by approxi-
mating a real-life problem, which may be extremely complicated, by a much
simpler model. For example, linear regression assumes that there is a linear
relationship between Y and X1 , X2 , . . . , Xp . It is unlikely that any real-life
problem truly has such a simple linear relationship, and so performing lin-
ear regression will undoubtedly result in some bias in the estimate of f . In
Figure 2.11, the true f is substantially non-linear, so no matter how many
training observations we are given, it will not be possible to produce an
accurate estimate using linear regression. In other words, linear regression
results in high bias in this example. However, in Figure 2.10 the true f
is very close to linear, and so given enough data, it should be possible for
linear regression to produce an accurate estimate. Generally, more flexible
methods result in less bias.
   As a general rule, as we use more flexible methods, the variance will
increase and the bias will decrease. The relative rate of change of these
two quantities determines whether the test MSE increases or decreases. As
we increase the flexibility of a class of methods, the bias tends to initially
decrease faster than the variance increases. Consequently, the expected
test MSE declines. However, at some point increasing flexibility has little
impact on the bias but starts to significantly increase the variance. When
this happens the test MSE increases. Note that we observed this pattern
of decreasing test MSE followed by increasing test MSE in the right-hand
panels of Figures 2.9–2.11.
   The three plots in Figure 2.12 illustrate Equation 2.7 for the examples in
Figures 2.9–2.11. In each case the blue solid curve represents the squared
bias, for different levels of flexibility, while the orange curve corresponds to
the variance. The horizontal dashed line represents Var("), the irreducible
error. Finally, the red curve, corresponding to the test set MSE, is the sum
34      2. Statistical Learning

of these three quantities. In all three cases, the variance increases and the
bias decreases as the method’s flexibility increases. However, the flexibility
level corresponding to the optimal test MSE differs considerably among the
three data sets, because the squared bias and variance change at different
rates in each of the data sets. In the left-hand panel of Figure 2.12, the
bias initially decreases rapidly, resulting in an initial sharp decrease in the
expected test MSE. On the other hand, in the center panel of Figure 2.12
the true f is close to linear, so there is only a small decrease in bias as flex-
ibility increases, and the test MSE only declines slightly before increasing
rapidly as the variance increases. Finally, in the right-hand panel of Fig-
ure 2.12, as flexibility increases, there is a dramatic decline in bias because
the true f is very non-linear. There is also very little increase in variance
as flexibility increases. Consequently, the test MSE declines substantially
before experiencing a small increase as model flexibility increases.
   The relationship between bias, variance, and test set MSE given in Equa-
tion 2.7 and displayed in Figure 2.12 is referred to as the bias-variance
trade-off. Good test set performance of a statistical learning method re-
                                                                                  bias-variance
quires low variance as well as low squared bias. This is referred to as a trade-off
trade-off because it is easy to obtain a method with extremely low bias but
high variance (for instance, by drawing a curve that passes through every
single training observation) or a method with very low variance but high
bias (by fitting a horizontal line to the data). The challenge lies in finding
a method for which both the variance and the squared bias are low. This
trade-off is one of the most important recurring themes in this book.
   In a real-life situation in which f is unobserved, it is generally not pos-
sible to explicitly compute the test MSE, bias, or variance for a statistical
learning method. Nevertheless, one should always keep the bias-variance
trade-off in mind. In this book we explore methods that are extremely
flexible and hence can essentially eliminate bias. However, this does not
guarantee that they will outperform a much simpler method such as linear
regression. To take an extreme example, suppose that the true f is linear.
In this situation linear regression will have no bias, making it very hard
for a more flexible method to compete. In contrast, if the true f is highly
non-linear and we have an ample number of training observations, then
we may do better using a highly flexible approach, as in Figure 2.11. In
Chapter 5 we discuss cross-validation, which is a way to estimate the test
MSE using the training data.



2.2.3    The Classification Setting
Thus far, our discussion of model accuracy has been focused on the regres-
sion setting. But many of the concepts that we have encountered, such
as the bias-variance trade-off, transfer over to the classification setting
with only some modifications due to the fact that yi is no longer quan-
titative. Suppose that we seek to estimate f on the basis of training obser-
vations {(x1 , y1 ), . . . , (xn , yn )}, where now y1 , . . . , yn are qualitative. The
most common approach for quantifying the accuracy of our estimate fˆ is
the training error rate, the proportion of mistakes that are made if we apply error rate
                                               2.2 Assessing Model Accuracy         35

our estimate fˆ to the training observations:
                                     n
                                  10
                                             % ŷi ).
                                        I(yi =                                   (2.8)
                                  n i=1

Here ŷi is the predicted class label for the ith observation using fˆ. And
I(yi %= ŷi ) is an indicator variable that equals 1 if yi %= ŷi and zero if yi = ŷi .
                                                                                         indicator
If I(yi %= ŷi ) = 0 then the ith observation was classified correctly by our variable
classification method; otherwise it was misclassified. Hence Equation 2.8
computes the fraction of incorrect classifications.
   Equation 2.8 is referred to as the training error rate because it is com-
                                                                                         training
puted based on the data that was used to train our classifier. As in the error
regression setting, we are most interested in the error rates that result from
applying our classifier to test observations that were not used in training.
The test error rate associated with a set of test observations of the form test error
(x0 , y0 ) is given by
                                  Ave (I(y0 =
                                            % ŷ0 )) ,                           (2.9)
where ŷ0 is the predicted class label that results from applying the classifier
to the test observation with predictor x0 . A good classifier is one for which
the test error (2.9) is smallest.

The Bayes Classifier
It is possible to show (though the proof is outside of the scope of this
book) that the test error rate given in (2.9) is minimized, on average, by a
very simple classifier that assigns each observation to the most likely class,
given its predictor values. In other words, we should simply assign a test
observation with predictor vector x0 to the class j for which

                                 Pr(Y = j|X = x0 )                              (2.10)

is largest. Note that (2.10) is a conditional probability: it is the probability
                                                                                 conditional
that Y = j, given the observed predictor vector x0 . This very simple clas- probability
sifier is called the Bayes classifier. In a two-class problem where there are
                                                                                 Bayes
only two possible response values, say class 1 or class 2, the Bayes classifier classifier
corresponds to predicting class one if Pr(Y = 1|X = x0 ) > 0.5, and class
two otherwise.
   Figure 2.13 provides an example using a simulated data set in a two-
dimensional space consisting of predictors X1 and X2 . The orange and
blue circles correspond to training observations that belong to two different
classes. For each value of X1 and X2 , there is a different probability of the
response being orange or blue. Since this is simulated data, we know how
the data were generated and we can calculate the conditional probabilities
for each value of X1 and X2 . The orange shaded region reflects the set of
points for which Pr(Y = orange|X) is greater than 50 %, while the blue
shaded region indicates the set of points for which the probability is below
50 %. The purple dashed line represents the points where the probability
is exactly 50 %. This is called the Bayes decision boundary. The Bayes
                                                                                 Bayes
classifier’s prediction is determined by the Bayes decision boundary; an decision
observation that falls on the orange side of the boundary will be assigned boundary
36     2. Statistical Learning


                                         oo o
                               oo        o
                                                 o
                                                        o
                            o       oo oo o
                                                        o
                         o             oo oo ooo
                             o         o             oo ooo o
                    oo o o           o        o ooo oo                   oo
                  o       o     o oo         o                       oo
                    oo      o       ooo o o o o o             o           o
                    o o           o oo o            o o
                     o oo               o o o           o o             o o
                      o o oooo o        ooo o o o o          ooo
                                                                 o
                               o
                              o o         oo o o o ooooo o o          o
            X2
                      o                    oo o o
                            oo o            o  o      o     o  o
                                                        o o o
                                      o oo
                                  o o o oo o ooo o                 o
                                            o               oo o
                                  oo           o ooooo oooo
                                   o                  o oo o o
                            o         o          oo oo o    o o
                             o     o                o oo ooo
                                                     ooo
                               o                                   o
                            o                            oo o
                                 o                 o o

                                             X1

FIGURE 2.13. A simulated data set consisting of 100 observations in each of
two groups, indicated in blue and in orange. The purple dashed line represents
the Bayes decision boundary. The orange background grid indicates the region
in which a test observation will be assigned to the orange class, and the blue
background grid indicates the region in which a test observation will be assigned
to the blue class.

to the orange class, and similarly an observation on the blue side of the
boundary will be assigned to the blue class.
  The Bayes classifier produces the lowest possible test error rate, called
the Bayes error rate. Since the Bayes classifier will always choose the class
                                                                              Bayes error
for which (2.10) is largest, the error rate will be 1−maxj Pr(Y = j|X = x0 ) rate
at X = x0 . In general, the overall Bayes error rate is given by
                                *                    +
                         1 − E max Pr(Y = j|X) ,                      (2.11)
                                      j


where the expectation averages the probability over all possible values of
X. For our simulated data, the Bayes error rate is 0.133. It is greater than
zero, because the classes overlap in the true population, which implies that
maxj Pr(Y = j|X = x0 ) < 1 for some values of x0 . The Bayes error rate is
analogous to the irreducible error, discussed earlier.

K-Nearest Neighbors
In theory we would always like to predict qualitative responses using the
Bayes classifier. But for real data, we do not know the conditional distri-
bution of Y given X, and so computing the Bayes classifier is impossi-
ble. Therefore, the Bayes classifier serves as an unattainable gold standard
against which to compare other methods. Many approaches attempt to
estimate the conditional distribution of Y given X, and then classify a
given observation to the class with highest estimated probability. One such
method is the K-nearest neighbors (KNN) classifier. Given a positive in-
                                                                                    K-nearest
                                                                                    neighbors
                                           2.2 Assessing Model Accuracy      37

teger K and a test observation x0 , the KNN classifier first identifies the
K points in the training data that are closest to x0 , represented by N0 .
It then estimates the conditional probability for class j as the fraction of
points in N0 whose response values equal j:

                                          1 0
                   Pr(Y = j|X = x0 ) =        I(yi = j).                  (2.12)
                                          K
                                             i∈N0


Finally, KNN classifies the test observation x0 to the class with the largest
probability from (2.12).
   Figure 2.14 provides an illustrative example of the KNN approach. In
the left-hand panel, we have plotted a small training data set consisting of
six blue and six orange observations. Our goal is to make a prediction for
the point labeled by the black cross. Suppose that we choose K = 3. Then
KNN will first identify the three observations that are closest to the cross.
This neighborhood is shown as a circle. It consists of two blue points and
one orange point, resulting in estimated probabilities of 2/3 for the blue
class and 1/3 for the orange class. Hence KNN will predict that the black
cross belongs to the blue class. In the right-hand panel of Figure 2.14 we
have applied the KNN approach with K = 3 at all of the possible values for
X1 and X2 , and have drawn in the corresponding KNN decision boundary.
   Despite the fact that it is a very simple approach, KNN can often pro-
duce classifiers that are surprisingly close to the optimal Bayes classifier.
Figure 2.15 displays the KNN decision boundary, using K = 10, when ap-
plied to the larger simulated data set from Figure 2.13. Notice that even
though the true distribution is not known by the KNN classifier, the KNN
decision boundary is very close to that of the Bayes classifier. The test error
rate using KNN is 0.1363, which is close to the Bayes error rate of 0.1304.
   The choice of K has a drastic effect on the KNN classifier obtained.
Figure 2.16 displays two KNN fits to the simulated data from Figure 2.13,
using K = 1 and K = 100. When K = 1, the decision boundary is overly
flexible and finds patterns in the data that don’t correspond to the Bayes
decision boundary. This corresponds to a classifier that has low bias but
very high variance. As K grows, the method becomes less flexible and
produces a decision boundary that is close to linear. This corresponds to
a low-variance but high-bias classifier. On this simulated data set, neither
K = 1 nor K = 100 give good predictions: they have test error rates of
0.1695 and 0.1925, respectively.
   Just as in the regression setting, there is not a strong relationship be-
tween the training error rate and the test error rate. With K = 1, the
KNN training error rate is 0, but the test error rate may be quite high. In
general, as we use more flexible classification methods, the training error
rate will decline but the test error rate may not. In Figure 2.17, we have
plotted the KNN test and training errors as a function of 1/K. As 1/K in-
creases, the method becomes more flexible. As in the regression setting, the
training error rate consistently declines as the flexibility increases. However,
the test error exhibits a characteristic U-shape, declining at first (with a
minimum at approximately K = 10) before increasing again when the
method becomes excessively flexible and overfits.
38     2. Statistical Learning


                                  o                                           o
                                      o    o                                      o   o
                          o                    o                      o                   o
                  o                                           o

                              o                                           o

            o                              o              o                           o
                                  o                                           o
                                      o                                           o
                      o                                           o



FIGURE 2.14. The KNN approach, using K = 3, is illustrated in a simple
situation with six blue observations and six orange observations. Left: a test
observation at which a predicted class label is desired is shown as a black cross.
The three closest points to the test observation are identified, and it is predicted
that the test observation belongs to the most commonly-occurring class, in this
case blue. Right: The KNN decision boundary for this example is shown in black.
The blue grid indicates the region in which a test observation will be assigned to
the blue class, and the orange grid indicates the region in which it will be assigned
to the orange class.
                                                   KNN: K=10


                                            oo o
                                      oo    o
                                                    o
                                                            o
                               o      oo oo o
                             o                      oo      o
                                          o oo
                                o         oo o           oo oo
                        oo o o          o        o      o oo o                oo
                      o       o oo                    oo o                oo
                               o       o o o oo            o
                        oo             oo           o o            o           o
                        o o         o oo o             o o
                         oo o              o     o o        o o              o o
                          o o oooo o       ooo o o o o            ooo
                                                                      o
                                  o             o o oo o o o               o
                                 o o         oo
             X2




                                                          o
                          o
                               oo o           oo o oo o             o
                                               o o        o     o
                                                            o o o
                                         o oo                     o
                                    o o o oo o oo o                     o
                                               o                 oo o
                                     oo            o ooooo o o
                                      o                      oo
                                                          o oo o o
                               o        o           oo oo o     o o
                                o    o                 o  oo o
                                                         oo
                                  o                        o  oo        o
                               o                             oo o
                                    o                 o o


                                                     X1

FIGURE 2.15. The black curve indicates the KNN decision boundary on the
data from Figure 2.13, using K = 10. The Bayes decision boundary is shown as
a purple dashed line. The KNN and Bayes decision boundaries are very similar.


   In both the regression and classification settings, choosing the correct
level of flexibility is critical to the success of any statistical learning method.
The bias-variance tradeoff, and the resulting U-shape in the test error, can
make this a difficult task. In Chapter 5, we return to this topic and discuss
                                                                               2.2 Assessing Model Accuracy                                       39

                                         KNN: K=1                                                       KNN: K=100


                                        o     o                                                         o     o
                              oo          o    o                                              oo          o    o
                                        o         o                                                     o               o
                          o             oo
                                        o                                                 o             oo    o
                                   oo                                                              oo
                                         o        o                                                            o        o
               o             oo oo o o             oo                                 o            oo oo o o             oo
                   o         o                 oo      o                                  o        o                 oo      o
          oo o o           o        o         o oo                   oo         oo o o           o        o         o oo                   oo
        o       o     o oo                 oo o                  oo           o       o     o oo                 oo o                  oo
                  o                o o           o                                      o                o o           o
           o              ooo o                                       o          o              ooo o                                       o
          o
          o o                           o o              o                      o
                                                                                o o                           o o              o
                        o oo o               o o                                              o oo o               o o
           o oo               o o                                   o   o        o oo               o o                                   o   o
                                        o
                                       o o        o  o                                                        o
                                                                                                             o o        o  o
            o o ooo o         ooo o            o       ooo
                                                             o                    o o ooo o         ooo o            o       ooo
                                                                                                                                   o
                   oo              o                    o         o                      oo              o                    o         o
                       o        oo       o o ooooo o                                         o        oo       o o ooooo o
            o       o                                                             o       o
                  oo o           o o o                                                  oo o           o o o
                                  oo o          o o oo o                                                oo o          o o oo o
                            o o o oo                       o                                      o o o oo                       o
                        o o o                  o oo o          o                              o o o                  o oo o          o
                                  o                     oo                                              o                     oo
                                       o           o o o                                                     o           o o o
                        oo                o oooo ooo                                          oo                o oooo ooo
                         o                      o oo o o                                       o                      o oo o o
                  o        o            oo oo o       o o                               o        o            oo oo o       o o
                                                oo o                                                                  oo o
                   o
                     o
                         o                   oooo   oo         o
                                                                                         o
                                                                                           o
                                                                                               o                   oooo   oo         o
                                                   oo o                                                                  oo o
                  o                                                                     o
                               o                   o                                           o                   o
                                                       o                                                               o




FIGURE 2.16. A comparison of the KNN decision boundaries (solid black
curves) obtained using K = 1 and K = 100 on the data from Figure 2.13. With
K = 1, the decision boundary is overly flexible, while with K = 100 it is not
sufficiently flexible. The Bayes decision boundary is shown as a purple dashed
line.
                   0.20
                   0.15
      Error Rate

                   0.10
                   0.05




                                        Training Errors
                   0.00




                                        Test Errors


                              0.01             0.02            0.05         0.10              0.20                     0.50         1.00

                                                                            1/K


FIGURE 2.17. The KNN training error rate (blue, 200 observations) and test
error rate (orange, 5,000 observations) on the data from Figure 2.13, as the level
of flexibility (assessed using 1/K on the log scale) increases, or equivalently as
the number of neighbors K decreases. The black dashed line indicates the Bayes
error rate. The jumpiness of the curves is due to the small size of the training
data set.

various methods for estimating test error rates and thereby choosing the
optimal level of flexibility for a given statistical learning method.
       40       2. Statistical Learning

       2.3      Lab: Introduction to Python
       2.3.1      Getting Started
       To run the labs in this book, you will need two things:

            1. An installation of Python3, which is the specific version of Python used
               in the labs.

            2. Access to Jupyter, a very popular Python interface that runs code
               through a file called a notebook.
                                                                                          notebook
         You can download and install Python3 by following the instructions avail-
       able at anaconda.com.
         There are a number of ways to get access to Jupyter. Here are just a few:

            1. Using Google’s Colaboratory service: colab.research.google.com/.

            2. Using JupyterHub, available at jupyter.org/hub.

            3. Using your own jupyter installation. Installation instructions are
               available at jupyter.org/install.

       Please see the Python resources page on the book website statlearning.com
       for up-to-date information about getting Python and Jupyter working on
       your computer.
         You will need to install the ISLP package, which provides access to the
       datasets and custom-built functions that we provide. Inside a macOS or
       Linux terminal type pip install ISLP; this also installs most other pack-
       ages needed in the labs. The Python resources page has a link to the ISLP
       documentation website.
         To run this lab, download the file Ch2-statlearn-lab.ipynb from the
       Python resources page. Now run the following code at the command line:
       jupyter lab Ch2-statlearn-lab.ipynb.
         If you’re using Windows, you can use the start menu to access anaconda,
       and follow the links. For example, to install ISLP and run this lab, you can
       run the same code above in an anaconda shell.


       2.3.2      Basic Commands
       In this lab, we will introduce some simple Python commands. For more
       resources about Python in general, readers may want to consult the tutorial
       at docs.python.org/3/tutorial/.
         Like most programming languages, Python uses functions to perform op-
                                                                                   function
       erations. To run a function called fun, we type fun(input1,input2), where
       the inputs (or arguments) input1 and input2 tell Python how to run the
       function. A function can have any number of inputs. For example, the argument
       print() function outputs a text representation of all of its arguments to
                                                                                   print()
       the console.
In [1]: print('fit a model with ', 11, 'variables ')
                                                2.3 Lab: Introduction to Python    41

       fit a model with 11 variables

        The following command will provide information about the print() func-
        tion.

In [2]: print?

            Adding two integers in Python is pretty intuitive.

In [3]: 3 + 5



Out[3]: 8

        In Python, textual data is handled using strings. For instance, "hello" and
                                                                                    string
        'hello' are strings. We can concatenate them using the addition + symbol.

In [4]: "hello" + " " + "world"



Out[4]: 'hello world '

        A string is actually a type of sequence: this is a generic term for an ordered sequence
        list. The three most important types of sequences are lists, tuples, and
        strings. We introduce lists now.
           The following command instructs Python to join together the numbers 3,
        4, and 5, and to save them as a list named x. When we type x, it gives us
                                                                                       list
        back the list.

In [5]: x = [3, 4, 5]
        x



Out[5]: [3, 4, 5]

        Note that we used the brackets [] to construct this list.
          We will often want to add two sets of numbers together. It is reasonable
        to try the following code, though it will not produce the desired results.

In [6]: y = [4, 9, 7]
        x + y



Out[6]: [3, 4, 5, 4, 9, 7]

        The result may appear slightly counterintuitive: why did Python not add
        the entries of the lists element-by-element? In Python, lists hold arbitrary
        objects, and are added using concatenation. In fact, concatenation is the concatenat-
        behavior that we saw earlier when we entered "hello" + " " + "world".         ion
          This example reflects the fact that Python is a general-purpose program-
        ming language. Much of Python’s data-specific functionality comes from
        other packages, notably numpy and pandas. In the next section, we will intro-
        duce the numpy package. See docs.scipy.org/doc/numpy/user/quickstart.html
        for more information about numpy.
         42        2. Statistical Learning

         2.3.3          Introduction to Numerical Python
         As mentioned earlier, this book makes use of functionality that is contained
         in the numpy library, or package. A package is a collection of modules that numpy
         are not necessarily included in the base Python distribution. The name numpy package
         is an abbreviation for numerical Python.
            To access numpy, we must first import it.                                 import
 In [7]: import numpy as np

         In the previous line, we named the numpy module np; an abbreviation for
                                                                                       module
         easier referencing.
           In numpy, an array is a generic term for a multidimensional set of numbers. array
         We use the np.array() function to define x and y, which are one-dimensional
                                                                                       np.array()
         arrays, i.e. vectors.
 In [8]: x = np.array ([3, 4, 5])
         y = np.array ([4, 9, 7])

         Note that if you forgot to run the import numpy as np command earlier,
         then you will encounter an error in calling the np.array() function in
         the previous line. The syntax np.array() indicates that the function be-
         ing called is part of the numpy package, which we have abbreviated as np.
           Since x and y have been defined using np.array(), we get a sensible result
         when we add them together. Compare this to our results in the previous
         section, when we tried to add two lists without using numpy.
 In [9]: x + y


 Out[9]: array ([ 7, 13, 12])

           In numpy, matrices are typically represented as two-dimensional arrays,
         and vectors as one-dimensional arrays.1 We can create a two-dimensional
         array as follows.
In [10]: x = np.array ([[1, 2], [3, 4]])
         x


Out[10]: array ([[1, 2],
