
CHAPTER 3

The becoming of essence

A. ABSOLUTE INDIFFERENCE

Being is abstract indifference,
and when this trait is to be thought by itself as being,
the abstract expression “indifferentness” has been used;
in which there is not supposed to be as yet
any kind of determinateness.
Pure quantity is this indifference in the sense of
being open to any determinations,
provided that these are external to it
and that quantity itself does not have
any link with them originating in it.
The indifference which can be called absolute,
however, is one which, through the negation of
every determinateness of being, of quality and quantity
and of their at first immediate unity, that is, of measure,
mediates itself with itself to form a simple unity.
Determinateness is in it still only a state, that is,
something qualitative and external
which has the indifference as a substrate.

But that which has thus been determined
as qualitative and external
is only a vanishing something;
as thus external with respect to being,
the qualitative sphere is the opposite of itself
and, as such, only the sublating of itself.
In this way, determinateness is still
only posited in the substrate
as an empty differentiation.
But it is precisely this empty differentiation
which is the indifference itself as result.
And this indifference is indeed concrete,
in the sense that it is self-mediated
through the negation of all the determinations of being.
As such a mediation, it contains negation and relation,
and what was called “state” is a differentiation
which is immanent to it and self-referring.
It is precisely this externality and its vanishing
which make the unity of being into an indifference:
consequently, they are inside this indifference,
which thereby ceases to be only a substrate
and, within, only abstract.

B. INDIFFERENCE AS INVERSE RATIO OF ITS FACTORS

We now have to see how this determination
of indifference is posited in the indifference itself
and the latter is posited, therefore, as existing for itself.

1. The reduction of at first
independently accepted measure-relations
establishes their one substrate;
this substrate is their continuing into one another
and is, therefore, the one indivisible independent measure
which is wholly present in its differentiation.
Present for this differentiation are
the two determinations contained
in the measure, quality and quantity,
and everything depends on how these two are posited in it.
But this is in turn determined by the fact that
the substrate is at first posited as result
and, though in itself mediation,
this mediation is not yet posited as such in it;
for this reason, it is in the first instance substrate
and, with respect to determinateness, indifference.

Consequently, the difference present in it is
at first essentially one which is only quantitative and external;
there simply are two different quanta of one and the same substrate
which would thus be their sum, itself posited as a quantum.
But the indifference is this fixed measure,
the implicitly existent absolute limit which,
as connected to those differences,
would not itself be in itself a quantum,
and would not in any way enter
into opposition with others,
whether as sum or also as exponent,
be those others sums or indifferences.
It is only the abstract determinateness
which falls into the indifference;
the two quanta, in order that
they may be posited in it as moments,
are alterable, indifferent, greater or smaller
relative to one another.
However, inasmuch as they are restricted
by the fixed limit of their sum,
they are at the same time related to
each other not externally, but negatively,
and this is now the qualitative determination
in which they stand to each other.
Accordingly, they stand in inverse ratio to each other.
This relation differs from the earlier formal inverted ratio
inasmuch as the limit is here a real substrate,
and each of the two sides is posited as
having to be in itself the whole.

According to the qualitative determinacy just stated,
the difference is present, further, in the form of two qualities,
each of which is sublated by the other
and yet, since the two are held together in the one unity
which they constitute, is inseparable from it.
The substrate itself, as the indifference,
is in itself likewise the unity of the two qualities;
consequently, each of the sides of the relation
equally contains both sides within itself
and is distinguished from the other
by a more of one quality
and a less of the other, or conversely.
The one quality, through its quantum,
only predominates on the one side,
as does the other quality on the other side.

Thus each side is in it an inverted relation
which, as formal, recurs in the two distinguished sides.
The sides themselves thus continue into each other
also according to their qualitative determinations;
each of the qualities relates itself in the other to itself
and is present in each of the two sides,
only in a different quantum.
Their quantitative difference is that indifference
in accordance with which they continue into each other,
and this continuation is the self-sameness of the qualities
in each of the two unities.
The sides, however, each containing
the whole of the determinations
and consequently the indifference itself,
are thus at the same time posited as
self-subsistent vis-a-vis each other.

2. As this indifference,
being is now the determinateness of measure
no longer in its immediacy
but in the developed manner just indicated;
it is indifference because it is in itself
the whole of the determinations of being
now resolved into this unity;
and it is existence as well,
as a totality of the posited realization,
in which the moments themselves are the totality of
the indifference existing in itself,
sustained by the latter as their unity.
But because the unity is held fast only as indifference
and consequently only implicitly in itself,
and the moments are not yet determined
as existing for themselves,
that is, are not yet determined as
sublating themselves into unity internally
and through each other,
what is here present is therefore simply
the indifference of the unity itself
towards itself as a developed determinateness.

This thus indivisible independent measure is
now to be more closely examined.
It is immanent in all its determinations
and in them it remains in unity with itself
and undisturbed by them.

But, (a) since the determinacies
sublated in it implicitly remain the totality,
they emerge in it groundlessly.
The implicit being of indifference
and its existence are thus unconnected;
the determinacies show up in the indifference in an immediate manner
and the indifference is in each of them entirely the same.
The difference between them is
thus posited at first as sublated, hence as quantitative;
for this reason, therefore, not as a self-repelling;
and the indifference not as self-determining,
but as having and becoming the determinate being
that it has only externally.

(b) The two moments are in inverse quantitative relation;
a fluctuating on the scale of magnitude
which is not however determined by the indifference,
which is precisely the indifference of the fluctuation,
but only externally.
For the determining appeal is made to an other
which lies outside the indifference.
The absolute, as indifference, has in this respect
the second defect of quantitative form,
namely that the determinateness of the difference is
not determined by the absolute itself,
just as it has the first defect in that
the differences emerge in it only in general, that is,
the positing of them is something immediate,
not a self-mediation.

(c) The quantitative determinateness of the moments which are now
sides of the relation constitutes the mode of their subsistence;
their existence is by virtue of this indifference
withdrawn from the transitoriness of quality.
But they do have a subsistence of their own in themselves,
one that differs from this quantitative existence,
for they are in themselves the indifference itself,
each the unity itself of the two qualities
into which the qualitative moment splits itself.
The difference of the two moments is restricted by
the fact that the one quality is posited
on the one side with a more
and in the other with a less,
and the other is posited
in inverse order accordingly.
Each side is thus in it the totality of the indifference.
Each of the two qualities taken singly for itself
likewise remains the same sum which the indifference is;
it continues from one side into the other
without being restricted by the quantitative limit
which is thereby posited in it.
At this, the determinations come into immediate opposition,
an opposition which develops into contradiction,
as we must now see.

3. Namely, each quality enters inside
each side in connection with the other,
and it does so in such a manner that, as has been determined,
this connection also is supposed to be only a quantitative difference.
If the two qualities are both self-subsistent
(something like sensible materials independent of each other)
then the whole determinateness of indifference falls apart;
their unity and totality would be empty names.
But they are at the same time determined as
comprised into one unity, as inseparable,
each having meaning and reality only in this one
qualitative connecting reference to the other.
But now, because their quantitativeness is simply
and solely of this qualitative nature,
 each reaches only as far as the other.
If they are assumed to differ as quanta,
then the one would reach beyond the other
and would have in this more an indifferent existence
which the other would not have.
As qualitatively connected, however,
each is only in so far as the other is.
The result is that they are in equilibrium,
so that to the extent that one increases or decreases,
the other likewise increases or decreases
and would do so in the same proportion.

On the basis, therefore, of their qualitative connection,
there is no question of a quantitative difference
or of a more of the one quality.
The more by which the one of the two connected moments
would exceed the other would be only an unstable determination,
or would only be the other itself again;
but, in this equality of the two, neither would then be there,
for their existence would have to rest on the inequality of their quantum.
Each of these supposed factors vanishes,
whether the one factor is assumed
to exceed the other or to be equal to it.
From the standpoint of quantitative representation,
the vanishing appears as a disturbance of the equilibrium,
one factor becoming greater than the other;
the sublation of the quality of the other
and its instability are thus posited;
the first factor becomes the predominant one
as the other diminishes with accelerated velocity
and is overcome by it;
this in turn constitutes itself as the one self-subsistent factor;
with this, however, there are no longer two specific moments
as factors but only the one whole.

This unity thus posited as the totality
of the process of determining,
itself determined in this process as indifference,
is a contradiction all around.
It must therefore be posited
as this self-sublating contradiction,
and be determined as subsistence existing for itself,
one which no longer has a merely indifferent unity
for result but a unity immanently negative and absolute.
This is essence.

C. TRANSITION INTO ESSENCE

Absolute indifference is the final determination of being
before the latter becomes essence;
but it does not attain essence.
It shows that it still belongs to the sphere of being
because it is still determined as indifferent,
and therefore difference is external to it, quantitative.
This externality is its existence, by which
it finds itself at the same time in the opposition of
being determined over against it as existing in itself,
not as being thought as the absolute that exists for itself.
Or again, it is external reflection
which insists that specific determinations,
whether in themselves or in the absolute,
are one and the same;
that their difference is only an indifferent one,
not a difference in itself.
What is still missing here is that
this reflection should sublate itself,
that it would cease to be the external
reflection of thought, of a subjective consciousness,
but that it would be rather the very determination of
the difference of that unity;
a unity which would then prove itself to be the absolute negativity,
the unity's indifference towards itself,
towards its own indifference no less than towards otherness.

But this self-sublation of the determination of
indifference has already manifested itself;
in the progressive positing of its being
it has shown itself on all sides to be contradiction.
Indifference is in itself the totality
in which all the determinations of being are sublated and contained;
thus it is the substrate,
but at first only in the one-sided determination of being-in-itself,
and consequently the differences,
the quantitative difference and the inverseratio of factors,
are present in it as external.
As thus the contradiction of itself and its determinateness,
of its implicitly existent determination
and of its posited determinateness,
it is the negative totality whose determinacies
have internally sublated themselves,
consequently, have also sublated the one-sidedness
of their substrate, their in-itselfness.
Indifference, now posited as what it in fact is,
is simple and infinitely negative self-reference,
the incompatibility of itself with itself,
the repelling of itself from itself.
Determining and being determined are
not a transition,
nor an external alteration,
nor again an emergence of determinations in it,
but its own referring to itself
which is the negativity of itself,
of its in-itselfness.

But as so repelled,
the determinations are not self-possessed;
do not emerge as self-subsistent or external
but are rather as moments:
first, as belonging to the unity
whose existence is still only implicit,
they are not let go by it but are rather borne by it
as their substrate and are filled by it alone;
and, second, as determinations immanent
to the unity as it exists for itself,
they are only through their repulsion from themselves.
Instead of some existent or other,
as they are in the whole sphere of being,
they now are simply and solely as posited,
with the sole determination and significance of
being referred to their unity
and hence each to the other and to negation,
marked by this their relativity.

Being in general and the being or immediacy
of the different determinacies have thereby vanished
just as much as the in-itselfness,
and the unity is being,
immediately presupposed totality,
so that it is only this simple self-reference,
mediated by the sublation of this presupposition,
and this pre-supposedness, the immediate being,
is itself only a moment of its repelling:
the original self-subsistence and self-identity are only
as the resulting infinite self-rejoining.
And so is being determined as essence:
being which, through the sublation of being,
is simple being with itself.
