
B. THE SYLLOGISM OF REFLECTION

The course of the qualitative syllogism has sublated
the abstractness of its terms;
the syllogistic term has thus posited itself as
a determinateness in which also
the other determinateness shines reflectively.
Besides the abstract terms,
there is also present in the syllogism
the connection of the terms,
and in the conclusion this connection is
posited as one which is mediated and necessary;
in truth, therefore, each determinateness is posited,
not singly by itself,
but with reference to the others,
as concrete determinateness.

The middle term was the abstract particularity,
an isolated simple determinateness,
and was a middle only externally
and relative to the self-subsisting extremes.
This term is now posited as the totality of the determinations;
thus it is the posited unity of the extremes;
but this unity is at first that of a reflection
embracing the extremes within itself;
an embracing which, as a first sublating of immediacy
and a first connecting of the determinations,
is not yet the absolute identity of the concept.

The extremes are the determinations of
the judgment of reflection, singularity proper,
and universality as a determination of relation,
or a reflection that embraces a manifold within itself.
But, as was shown in connection with the judgment of reflection,
the singular subject also contains,
besides the mere singularity that belongs to form,
determinateness as universality absolutely reflected into itself,
as presupposed, that is, here still immediately assumed, genus.

From this determinateness of the extremes,
which belongs to the course of the determination of the judgment,
there results the more precise content of the middle,
which is what counts most in the syllogism,
for it is the middle that distinguishes
the syllogism from judgment.
The middle contains
(1) singularity;
(2) but singularity expanded into universality, as an “all”;
(3) the universality that lies at the basis,
uniting singularity and abstract universality in itself, the genus.
The syllogism of reflection is thus the first
to possess genuine determinateness of form,
for the middle is posited as the totality of determinations;
the immediate syllogism is by contrast indeterminate
because the middle is still only abstract particularity
in which the moments of its concept are not yet posited.
This first syllogism of reflection may be called
the syllogism of allness.

a. The syllogism of allness

1. The syllogism of allness is
the syllogism of the understanding in its perfection
but more than that it is not yet.
That the middle in it is not abstract particularity
but is developed into its moments
and is therefore concrete,
is indeed an essential requirement of the concept.
But at first the form of the allness
gathers the singular into universality only externally,
and conversely the singular behaves in the universality
still as an immediate that subsists on its own.
The negation of the immediacy of the determinations
which was the result of the syllogism of existence is
only the first negation, not yet the negation of the negation,
or absolute immanent reflection.
The singular determinations that
the universality of reflection holds within still lie,
therefore, at the basis of that universality;
in other words, allness is not yet the universality of the concept,
but the external universality of reflection.

The syllogism of existence was contingent
because its middle term was
one single determinateness of the concrete subject
and as such admitted of a multitude of other such middle terms,
and consequently the subject could be conjoined
in conclusion with an indeterminate number of other predicates,
with opposite predicates as well.
But since the middle term now contains singularity
and is thereby itself concrete,
only a predicate that concretely belongs to
the subject can be attached to the latter by means of it.
For instance, if from the middle term “green”
the conclusion is made to follow that a painting is pleasing,
because green is pleasing to the eye,
or if a poem, a building, etc., is said to be beautiful
because it possesses regularity,
the painting, the poem, the building, etc.,
may nonetheless still be ugly on
account of other determinations
from which this predicate “ugly” might be deduced.
By contrast, when the middle term has the determination of allness,
it contains the green, the regularity, as a concreted term
which for that very reason is not
the abstraction of a mere green, a mere regular, etc.;
only predicates commensurate with concrete totality
may now be attached to this concreted term.
In the judgment, “what is green or regular is pleasing,”
the subject is only the abstraction of green, regularity;
in the proposition, “all things green or regular are pleasing,”
the subject is on the contrary all actual concrete things
that are green or regular things, therefore,
that are intended as concreted with all the properties
that they may also have besides the green or the regularity.

2. However, this very reflective perfection
of the syllogism makes of it a mere illusion.
The middle term has the determinateness of “all,”
to which there is immediately attached in the major
the predicate which in the conclusion is
then conjoined with the subject.
But the “all” is “all singulars”;
in it, therefore, the subject already possesses
that predicate immediately;
it does not first obtain it
by means of the syllogistic inference.
Or again, the subject obtains a predicate as
a consequence through the conclusion;
but the major premise already contains this conclusion in it;
therefore the major premise is not correct on its own account,
or is not an immediately presupposed judgment,
but itself already presupposes the conclusion
of which it should be the ground.

In the much cited syllogism:

All humans are mortal,
Now Gaius is a human,
Therefore Gaius is mortal,

the major premise is correct only because
and to the extent that the conclusion is correct;
were Gaius by chance not mortal,
the major premise would not be correct.
The proposition which was supposed to be the conclusion
must be correct on its own, immediately,
for otherwise the major premise would not include all singulars;
before the major premise can be accepted as correct,
the antecedent question is whether the conclusion
may not be a counter-instance of it.

3. It followed from the concept of the syllogism,
with regard to the syllogism of existence,
that the premises, as immediate, contradicted the conclusion,
that is to say, contradicted the mediation
that the concept of the syllogism requires;
that the first syllogism thus presupposed other syllogisms,
and conversely these presupposed the first.
In the syllogism of reflection this result
is posited in the syllogism itself:
the major premise presupposes its conclusion,
for it contains the union of the singular with a
predicate that would have to be a conclusion first.
What we have here in fact can therefore be expressed by saying that
the syllogism of reflection is only an external,
empty reflective semblance of syllogistic inference;
that therefore the essence of the inference rests on
subjective singularity;
this singularity thus constitutes the middle term and
is to be posited as such:
singularity which is singularity as such and pos-
sesses universality only externally.
Or what has been shown on closer
inspection of the content of the syllogism of reflection is that the sin-
gular stands connected to its predicate immediately,
not by way of an inference,
and that the major premise,
the union of a particular with a universal,
or more precisely of a formal universal with a universal in itself,
is mediated through the connection of the singularity
that is present in the formal universal,
of singularity as allness.
But this is the syllogism of induction.

b. The syllogism of induction

1. The syllogism of allness comes under
the schema of the first figure, S-P-U;
the syllogism of induction under that of the second, U-S-P,
because it again has singularity for its middle term,
not abstract singularity but singularity as completed,
that is to say, posited with its opposite determination,
that of universality.
The one extreme is some predicate or other
which is common to all these singulars;
its connection with them makes up
the kind of immediate premises,
of which one was supposed to be the conclusion
in the preceding syllogism.
The other extreme may be the immediate genus,
as it is in the middle term of the preceding syllogism,
or in the subject of the universal judgment,
and which is exhausted in the collection of
singulars or also species of the middle term.
Accordingly, the syllogism has this configuration:

s
s
U -- P
s
s
ad
infinitum.

2. The second figure of the formal syllogism, U-S-P,
does not correspond to this schema,
because the S that constitutes the middle term
did not subsume or was not a predicate.
In induction this deficiency is eliminated;
here the middle term is “all singulars”;
the proposition, U-S, which contains
as the subject the objective universal
or the genus set apart as an extreme,
has a predicate which is
of at least equal extension  as the subject
and is consequently identical with it for external reflection.
Lion, elephant, etc., constitute the genus of quadruped;
the difference, that the same content is posited
once in singularity and again in universality,
is thus just an indifferent determination of form
an indifference which in the syllogism of reflection is
the posited result of the formal syllogism
and is posited here through the equality of extension.

Induction, therefore, is not the syllogism
of mere perception or of contingent existence,
like the second figure corresponding to it,
but the syllogism of experience;
of the subjective gathering together of singulars in the genus,
and of the conjoining of the genus with a universal determinateness on
the ground that the latter is found in all singulars.
It also has the objective significance
that the immediate genus has determined itself
through the totality of singularity as
a universal property and possesses its existence
in a universal relation or mark.
But the objective significance of this syllogism,
as it was of the others, is at first
only its inner concept,
and is not as yet posited in it.

3. On the contrary, induction is
essentially still a subjective syllogism.
The middle terms are the singulars in their immediacy,
the collecting of them into a genus through the allness
is an external reflection.
Because of the persisting immediacy of the singulars
and because of the externality that derives from it,
the universality is only completeness,
or rather, it remains a task.
In induction, therefore, there recurs
the progression into the bad infinity;
singularity ought to be posited as
identical with universality,
but since the singulars are equally posited as
immediate, the intended unity remains only a perpetual ought;
it is a unity of likeness;
the terms which are supposed to be identical are
at the same time supposed not to be identical.
The a, b, c, d, e, constitute the genus
only further on, in the infinite;
they do not yield a complete experience.
The conclusion of induction thus remains problematic.

But induction, by expressing that perception,
in order to become experience,
ought to be carried on to infinity,
presupposes that the genus is in and for itself
conjoined with its determinateness.
In this, it in fact rather presupposes
its conclusion as something immediate,
just as the syllogism of allness
presupposes the conclusion for one of its premises.
An experience that rests on induction is
assumed as valid even though
the perception is admittedly not complete;
it may be assumed, however,
that there is no counter-instance
to the experience only if
the latter is true in and for itself.
Inference by induction, therefore, is
based indeed on an immediacy,
but not on the immediacy on which it is supposed to be based,
not on a singularity that exists immediately,
but on one that exists in and for itself,
on the universal.
The fundamental character of induction is
that it is a syllogistic inference;
if singularity is taken as
the essential determination of the middle term,
but universality as only the external determination,
then the middle term would fall apart into two disjoined parts,
and there would be no inference;
this externality belongs rather to the extremes.
Singularity can only be a middle term
if immediately identical with the universality;
such a universality is in truth
objective universality, the genus.
The matter can also be viewed in this way:
universality is external but essential
to the determination of the singularity
which is at the basis of the middle term of induction;
such an external is just as much
immediately its opposite, the internal.
The truth of the syllogism of induction is therefore
a syllogism that has for its middle term a singularity
which is immediately in itself universality.
This is the syllogism of analogy.

c. The syllogism of analogy

1. This syllogism has the third figure
of the immediate syllogism, S-U-P,
for its abstract schema.
But its middle term is no longer
some single quality or other
but a universality
which is the immanent reflection of a concreted term
and is therefore its nature;
and conversely, since it is thus
the universality of a concreted term,
it is at the same time in itself this concreted term.
Here, therefore, a singular is the middle term,
but a singular taken in its universal nature;
there is moreover another singular, an extreme term,
which has the same universal nature as
the other which is the middle term.
For example:

The earth has inhabitants,
The moon is an earth,
Therefore the moon has inhabitants.

2. Analogy is all the more superficial,
the more the universal in which
the two extremes are united,
and in accordance with which the one extreme
becomes the predicate of the other,
is a mere quality or, since quality is
a matter of subjectivity,
is some distinctive mark or other
and the identity of the extremes is
therein taken as just a similarity.
But this kind of superficiality to which
a form of understanding or of reason is reduced
debased to the sphere of mere representation
should have no place in logic.
Also unacceptable is to present
the major premise of this syllogism
as though it should run:
“That which is similar to an object in one distinctive mark
is similar to it in other such marks as well.”
On this formulation, the form of the syllogism is
expressed in the shape of a content
while the empirical content,
the content properly so called,
is together relegated to the minor premise.
So, for example, could also the whole form of the first syllogism
be expressed as its major premise:
“That which is subsumed under another thing
in which a third thing inheres has
that third thing inhering in it too;
but now . . . etc.”
But what matters in the syllogism as such is
not the empirical content,
and to make its own form
the content of a major premise
makes just as little difference
as to take any other empirical content for that purpose.
Nothing of consequence follows for the syllogism of analogy
from a content that contains nothing
but the form peculiar to that syllogism,
just as nothing of consequence would have followed
for the first syllogism from having as its content
the form that makes the syllogism a syllogism.
What counts is always the form of the syllogism,
whether the latter has itself or something else
for its empirical content.
So the syllogism of analogy is
a form peculiarly its own,
and it is vacuous not to want to regard it as such
on the ground that that form could be made into
the content or matter of a major premise
whereas matter is no concern in logic.
What might tempt one to this view
in regard to the syllogism of analogy,
and perhaps in regard to the syllogism of induction too,
is that the middle term in them,
and also the extremes,
are more determined than they are in the
merely formal syllogism,
and therefore the determinations of form,
since they are no longer simple and abstract,
must also take on the appearance of a content determination.
But that the form determines itself to content is
first of all a necessary advance on the part of the formal side,
and therefore an advance that touches
the nature of the syllogism essentially;
secondly, such a content determination cannot, therefore,
be regarded as any other empirical content,
and abstraction cannot be made from it.

When we consider the syllogism of analogy
with its major premise expressed as above, namely,
“if two subject matters agree in one or more properties,
then a further property of one also belongs to the other,”
it may seem that this syllogism contains four terms,
the quaternio terminorum,
a circumstance that brings with it the difficulty of
how to bring analogy into the form of a formal syllogism.
There are two singulars;
for a third, a property immediately assumed as common,
and, for a fourth, the other properties
that one singular possesses immediately
but the other first comes to possess
only by means of the syllogism.
This is so because, as we have seen,
in the syllogism of analogy
the middle term is posited as singularity
but immediately also as the true
universality of the singularity.
In induction, the middle term is,
apart from the extremes,
an indeterminate number of singulars;
this syllogism, therefore, required the enumeration
of an infinite number of terms.
In the syllogism of allness the universality
in the middle term is still only
the external form determination of the allness;
in the syllogism of analogy, on the contrary,
it is as essential universality.
In the above example, the middle term, “the earth,”
is taken as something concrete which, in truth,
is just as much a universal nature or genus
as it is a singular.

From this aspect, the quaternio terminorum would not make analogy
an imperfect syllogism.
But it would make it so from another aspect;
for although the one subject has
the same universal nature as the other,
it is undetermined whether the determinateness,
which is inferred to pertain also to the second subject,
pertains to the first because of its nature in general
or because of its particularity;
for example, whether the earth has inhabitants
as a heavenly body in general
or only as this particular heavenly body.
Analogy is still a syllogism of reflection
inasmuch as singularity and universality
are united in its middle term immediately.
Because of this immediacy, the externality of
the unity of reflection is still there;
the singular is the genus only in itself, implicitly;
it is not posited in this negativity
by which its determinateness would be
the genus's own determinateness.
For this reason the predicate that belongs
to the singular of the middle term
is not already the predicate of the other singular,
even though the two singulars both belong to the one genus.

3. S-P (“the moon is inhabited”) is the conclusion;
but the one premise (“the earth is inhabited”) is likewise S-P;
in so far as S-P is supposed to be a conclusion,
it entails the requirement that that premise also be S-P.
This syllogism is thus in itself the demand
to counter the immediacy that it contains;
or again, it presupposes its conclusion.
One syllogism of existence has its presupposition
in the other syllogism of existence.
In the syllogisms just considered,
the presupposition has been moved into them,
because they are syllogisms of reflection.
Since the syllogism of analogy is therefore
the demand that it be mediated as against the immediacy
with which its mediation is burdened,
what it demands is the sublation of the moment of singularity.
Thus there remains for the middle term the objective universal,
the genus purified of immediacy.
In the syllogism of analogy the genus was
a moment of the middle term
only as immediate presupposition;
since the syllogism itself demands
the sublation of the presupposed immediacy,
the negation of singularity and hence the universal is
no longer immediate but posited.
The syllogism of reflection contained
the first negation of immediacy;
the second has now come on the scene,
and with it the external universality of reflection is
determined as existing in and for itself.
Regarded from the positive side,
the conclusion shows itself to be
identical with the premises,
the mediation to have rejoined its presupposition,
and what we have is thus an identity of
the universality of reflection
by virtue of which it becomes
a higher universality.

Reviewing the course of the syllogism of reflection,
we find that mediation is in general
the posited or concrete unity
of the form determinations of the extremes;
reflection consists in this positing of
the one determination in the other;
the mediating middle is thus allness.
But it is singularity that
proves to be the essential ground of mediation
while universality is only as a
n external determination in it, as completeness.
But universality is essential to the singular
if the latter is to be the conjoining middle term;
is therefore to be taken as an implicitly existing universal.
But the singular is not united with it in just this positive manner
but is sublated in it and is a negative moment;
thus the universal is the genus posited
as existing in and for itself,
and the singular as immediate is rather
the externality of the genus,
or it is an extreme.
The syllogism of reflection, taken in general,
comes under the schema P-S-U
in which the singular is still as such
the essential determination of the middle term;
but since its immediacy has been sublated,
the syllogism has entered under the formal schema S-U-P,
and the syllogism of reflection has thus passed over
into the syllogism of necessity.
