B. NODAL LINES OF MEASURE-RELATIONS

The last determination of the measure-relation was
that, as specific, it is exclusive;
exclusiveness accrues to neutrality
as a negative unity of the distinct moments.
For this unity existing for itself,
for this elective affinity,
no further principle has become available
specifying its connection with other neutralities;
the specification resides only in
the quantitative determination of affinity in general,
according to which it is specific amounts that neu-
tralize themselves
and consequently stand opposed to other relative elective
affinities of their moments.
But further, because the basic determination is quantitative,
the exclusive elective affinity continues also
into these opposite neutralities,
and this continuity is not just
an external comparative connection of the different ratios
of the neutralities but the neutrality,
as such, has an element of separability in it,
for it is as self-subsisting somethings
that the moments from whose union
it has come to be enter into connection
with one or the other of the opposite series:
they enter into the connection indifferently,
even though they combine in different specific determinate amounts.
This measure, internally based on such a relation,
is for this reason affected by an indifference of its own;
it is something which is external within
and alterable in its reference to itself.

This self-reference of the measure-relation differs
from the externality and alterability
which belong to its quantitative side.
In contrast to these, its self-reference is
an existent qualitative foundation,
a permanent, material substrate
which, since it is also the continuity of
the measure with itself in its externality,
would have to contain in its quality the said
principle of specification of this externality.

Now in more developed form, as external
to itself in its being-for-itself,
the exclusive measure repels itself from itself
and posits itself both as another merely quantitative relation
and as another relation which is as such
at the same time another measure;
it is determined as in itself a specifying unity
which produces measure-relations within itself.
These relations differ from affinities of
the kind mentioned above in which
an independent measure relates itself
to independent measures of another quality
and to a series of these.
They occur in one and the same substrate
within the same moments of the neutrality;
the self-repelling measure takes on the determination
of other only qualitatively diverse relations,
and these relations likewise form affinities and measures,
alternating with those that remain only quantitative diversities.
They form in this way a nodal line of measures
on a scale of more and less.

Here we have a measure-relation,
self-subsistent reality qualitatively distinguished from others.
Such a being-for-itself, since it essentially is
at the same time a relation of quanta,
is open to externality and quantitative alteration;
it has a margin within which it remains indifferent to this
alteration and does not alter its quality.
But there comes a point in the quantitative alteration
at which this quality alters and the quantum shows
itself to be specifying,
so that the altered quantitative relation is
suddenly turned into a measure
and thereby into a new quality,
a new something.
The relation that has now replaced the first
is determined by the latter,
both because of the qualitative sameness
of the moments which are in affinity
and because of the quantitative continuity.
But since the distinction falls on
the side of this quantitative moment,
the new something stands indifferently
related to the preceding one;
the difference between the two is
the external one of quantum.
The new something has not therefore
emerged out of the preceding one;
it has emerged rather immediately from itself, that is,
from the internal specifying unity
which has not yet entered into existence.
The new quality or the new something is
subjected to the same progression of alteration,
and so on, into infinity.

Inasmuch as the advance from a quality proceeds
in the steady continuity of quantity,
the ratios approaching the one qualifying point are distinguished,
quantitatively considered, by a more or less.
In this respect, the alteration is a gradual one.
But the gradualness concerns merely the
externality of the alteration, not its qualitative moment;
the preceding quantitative relation,
though infinitely near to the succeeding one,
is still another qualitative existence.
From the qualitative side, therefore,
the gradual, merely quantitative progression
which has no limits in itself,
is absolutely interrupted;
and since in its merely quantitative connection
the newly emerging quality is with respect to
the vanishing one an indeterminate other,
one which is indifferent to it,
the transition is a leap;
the two are posited as wholly external to each other.
It is a favorite practice to try to make an alteration
conceptually comprehensible by the gradualness of
the transition leading up to it;
but gradualness is rather alteration precisely
as merely indifferent, the opposite of a qualitative alteration.
Rather, in gradualness the connecting link between two realities
(be they states or self-subsistent things)
is sublated, what is posited is that
neither reality is the limit of the other,
but that each is absolutely external to the other.
Thus, the very point necessary for the conceptual comprehension
of the alteration is missed,
although little enough is required for that purpose.

