C. THE BEING-FOR-ITSELF IN MEASURE

1. In the form of specified measure just considered,
the quantitative moment of each side is qualitatively determined
(both in the ratio of powers);
they are thus moments of
one measure-determinateness of qualitative nature.
Here, however, the qualities are
still posited immediately, only as diverse;
they are not related in the manner
of their quantitative determinacies,
that is, that outside their relation
they would have neither meaning nor existence,
as is the case for the quantitative determinacies
as a ratio of powers.
The qualitative moment thus disguises itself as specifying,
not itself, but the determinateness of magnitude.
Only within the latter is it posited;
for itself it is instead immediate quality as such
which, besides the fact that it
posits the magnitude as non-indifferent,
and besides its connection with its other,
still has existence subsisting on its own.
Thus space and time, outside that specification
which their quantitative determinateness obtains
in the motion of falling bodies
or in the absolutely free motion,
both have the value of space in general and time in general,
space subsisting on its own outside and without the duration of time,
and time flowing on its own independently of space.

This immediacy of the qualitative moment as against
its specific measure-relation is, however,
equally bound up with a quantitative immediacy
and with the indifference to this same measure-relation
of the quantitative element in it;
the immediate quality also has only an immediate quantum.
For that reason, the specific measure also has
a side of an at first external alteration
which advances in merely arithmetical progression undisturbed by it
and in which falls the external and hence merely empirical
determination of magnitude.
Quality and quantum, even as they extend outside measure,
are at the same time connected with it;
the immediacy is a moment of their belonging to measure.
Thus the immediate qualities also belong to measure,
are likewise connected and stand in a ratio
which, outside the specified one of power determination,
is itself only a direct ratio and an immediate measure.
This conclusion and its consequences must now be indicated.

2. Although the immediately determined quantum is as
a moment of measure otherwise implicitly grounded in a conceptual nexus,
in connection with specific measure it is, as such, externally given.
But the immediacy which is thereby posited is
the negation of the determination of qualitative measure;
the same immediacy was shown just now
on the sides of the determination of measure
which appeared for that reason to be self-subsisting qualities.
Such a negation and the return to immediate
quantitative determinateness are present
in the qualitatively determined relation
because a relation of distinct terms
entails as such the connection of such terms
in one determinateness,
and here, in the quantitative sphere,
in distinction from the determination of the relation,
this determinateness is a quantum.
As the negation of the distinct, qualitatively determined sides,
this exponent is a being-for-itself,
an absolutely determined being,
but is so only in itself;
as existence, it is a simple immediate quantum,
the quotient or exponent of a ratio between the sides of measure
which is taken as direct;
as such, however, it appears in the quantitative side
of measure as an empirical unit.
In the motion of falling bodies,
the spaces traversed are proportional
to the square of the elapsed time, s = at^2.
This is a specifically determinate ratio,
one between space and time;
the other, the direct ratio, would pertain to space and time
as mutually indifferent qualities;
it is supposed to be the ratio of the space traversed
to the first moment of time.
The same coefficient, a, remains in all the succeeding time-points;
the unit of the amount, determined for its part by the specifying measure,
being an ordinary quantum.
This unit counts at the same time as
the exponent of that direct ratio
which pertains to the merely imagined, the bad,
that is, the reflectively formal velocity
which is not specifically determined by the concept.
Such a velocity does not have concrete existence here,
no more than does the one previously mentioned
which is supposed to pertain to a falling body
at the end of a moment of time.
That velocity is ascribed to
the first temporal moment in the fall,
but this so-called temporal moment is itself
only an assumed unit which has no existence
as such an atomic point.
The beginning of the motion
(its alleged smallness would make no difference)
is straight away a magnitude
and one which is specified by the law of falling bodies.
The said empirical quantum is attributed to the force of gravity,
and this force thus has itself no connection with the
specification at hand
(the determinateness of powers),
that is, with the determinateness characteristic of measure.
The immediate moment, that in the motion of falling bodies
the amount of some fifteen spatial units
which are assumed as feet enter into one unit of time
(call it a second, the so-called first unit),
is an immediate measure, just like the size of human limbs,
the distances and diameters of planets, etc.
The determination of such measures falls elsewhere
than within the qualitative determination of measure,
here of the law itself of falling bodies.
On what such numbers depend, these merely immediate
and therefore empirical appearances of a measure;
on this the concrete sciences have yet to give us any information.
Here we are only concerned with this conceptual determination,
namely that in any determination of measure
the empirical coefficient constitutes the being-for-itself,
but only the moment of the being-for-itself,
in so far as it is in principle and therefore as immediate.
The other moment is the development of this being-for-itself,
the specific measure-determinateness of the sides.
According to this second moment,
in the ratio expressing the motion of falling bodies
(this motion that is still half conditioned and half free)
gravity is to be regarded as a force of nature.
Its ratio is thus determined by the nature of time and space,
and the said specification, the ratio of powers, therefore falls in it;
the other moment mentioned above, the simple direct ratio,
expresses only a mechanical relation of time and space,
a reflectively formal velocity externally produced
and externally determined.

3. Measure has now taken on the determination
of being a specified quantitative relation,
one which, as qualitative, has within it the usual external quantum;
but this quantum is not a quantum in general
but essentially the determining moment
of the relation as such;
it is thus an exponent and,
because of the immediacy now of its determinateness,
an invariable exponent, consequently an exponent
of the already mentioned direct ratio
of the same qualities whose reciprocal quantitative relation is
at the same time specifically determined by the ratio.
In the example of measure that we have used,
that of the motion of falling bodies,
this direct ratio is, as it were,
anticipated and assumed as given,
but, as remarked, in this motion it still
does not have concrete existence.
However, that matter is now realized,
in that its sides are both measures,
one distinguished as immediate and external
and the other as internally specified,
while measure itself is the unity of the two
this constitutes a further determination.
As the unity of its two sides,
measure contains the relation in which the magnitudes,
by virtue of the nature of the qualities,
are posited as determined and non-indifferent;
its determinateness, therefore, is entirely immanent and self-subsisting,
and has at the same time collapsed into the being-for-itself
of an immediate quantum, the exponent of a direct ratio.
In this the self-determination of measure is negated,
for in this immediate quantum,
its other, measure has a final self-existent determinateness;
conversely, the immediate measure
which ought to be internally qualitative
assumes truly qualitative determinateness only in that other.
This negative unity is real being-for-itself,
the category of a something which is the unity of qualities
in a relation of measure, a complete self-subsistence.
The two resulting diverse relations also
immediately yield a twofold existence,
or, more precisely, that self-subsisting whole,
as a being that exists for itself, is as such in itself
a repulsion into distinct self-subsisting
somethings whose qualitative nature
and subsistence (materiality) lies
in their determinateness of measure.

