A. CONTINGENCY OR FORMAL ACTUALITY, POSSIBILITY, AND NECESSITY

1. Actuality is formal inasmuch as, as a first actuality,
it is only immediate, unreflected actuality,
and hence is only in this form determination
but not as the totality of form.
And so it is nothing more than a being,
or concrete existence in general.
But because by essence it is not mere concrete existence
but is the form-unity of the in-itselfness
or inwardness and externality,
it immediately contains in-itselfness or possibility.
What is actual is possible.

2. This possibility is actuality reflected into itself.
But this reflectedness, itself a first, is equally something formal
and consequently only the determination of self-identity
or of the in-itself in general.

But because the determination is here totality of form,
this in-itself is determined as sublated
or essentially only with reference to actuality;
as the negative of actuality, it is posited as negative.
Possibility entails, therefore, two moments.
It has first the positive moment
of being a being-reflected-into-itself.
But this being-reflected-into-itself,
since in the absolute form it is reduced to a moment,
no longer has the value of essence but has rather
the negative meaning that possibility is (in a second moment)
something deficient, that it points to an other, to actuality,
and is completed in this other.

According to the first, merely positive side,
possibility is therefore the mere
form determination of self-identity,
or the form of essentiality.
As such it is the relationless, indeterminate
receptacle of everything in general.
In this formal sense of possibility,
everything is possible
that does not contradict itself;
the realm of possibility is therefore
limitless manifoldness.
But every manifold is determined in itself
and as against an other:
it possesses negation within.
Indifferent diversity passes over
as such into opposition;
but opposition is contradiction.
Therefore, all things are
just as much contradictory
and hence impossible.

When we therefore say of something
that “it is possible,”
this purely formal assertion is
just as superficial and empty
as the principle of contradiction,
and any content that we put into it,
“A is possible,” says no more than “A is A.”
Left undeveloped, this content has
the form of simplicity;
only after being resolved
into its determinations,
does difference emerge within it.
To the extent that we stop at that
simple for the content remains
something self-identical
and hence a possible.
But we do not say anything by it,
just as we do not with the principle of identity.

Yet the possible amounts to more
than just the principle of identity.
The possible is reflected immanent reflectedness;
or the identical simply as a moment of the totality,
hence also as determined not to be in itself;
it therefore has the second determination of being only a possible
and the ought-to-be of the totality of form.
Without this ought-to-be, possibility is essentiality as such;
but the absolute form entails this,
that essence itself is only a moment
and that it has no truth without being.
Possibility is this mere essentiality,
but so posited as to be only a moment,
to be disproportionate with respect to the absolute form.
It is the in-itself, determined as only a posited
or, equally, as not to be in itself.

Internally, therefore, possibility is contradiction,
or it is impossibility.

This finds expression at first in this way,
that possibility as form determination
posited as sublated possesses a content in general.
As possible, this content is an in-itself
which is at the same time something sublated
or an otherness.
But because this content is only a possible,
an other opposite to it is equally possible.
“A is A”; then, too, “not-A is not-A.”
These two statements each express
the possibility of its content determination.
But, as identical statements,
they are indifferent to each other;
that the other is also added,
is not posited in either.
Possibility is the connection comparing the two;
as a reflection of the totality,
it implies that the opposite also is possible.
It is therefore the ground for drawing the connection that,
because A equals A, not-A also equals not-A;
entailed in the possible A there is also the possible not-A,
and it is this reference itself connecting them
which determines both as possible.

But this connection, in which
the one possible also contains its other,
is as such a contradiction that sublates itself.
Now, since it is determined to be reflective
and, as we have just seen, reflectively self-sublating,
it is also therefore an immediate
and it consequently becomes actuality.

3. This actuality is not the first actuality
but reflected actuality,
posited as unity of itself and possibility.
What is actual is as such possible;
it is in immediate positive identity with possibility;
but the latter has determined itself as only possibility;
consequently the actual is also determined as only a possible.
And because possibility is immediately contained in actuality,
it is immediately in it as sublated, as only possibility.
Conversely, actuality which is in unity with possibility
is only sublated immediacy;
or again, because formal actuality is only immediate first actuality,
it is only a moment, only sublated actuality, or only possibility.

With this we also have a more precise expression of
the extent to which possibility is actuality.
Possibility is not yet all actuality;
there has been no talk yet of real and absolute actuality.
It is still only the possibility as it first presented itself,
namely the formal possibility that has determined itself
as being only possibility and hence the formless actuality
which is only being or concrete existence in general.
Everything possible has therefore in general
a being or a concrete existence.

This unity of possibility and actuality is contingency.
The contingent is an actual which is at the same time
determined as only possible,
an actual whose other or opposite equally is.
This actuality is, therefore, mere being or concrete existence,
but posited in its truth as having the value
of a positedness or a possibility.
Conversely, possibility is immanent reflection
or the in-itself posited as positedness;
what is possible is an actual in this sense of actuality,
that it has only as much value as contingent actuality;
it is itself something contingent.

The contingent thus presents these two sides.
First, in so far as it has possibility immediately in it,
or, what is the same, in so far as
this possibility is sublated in it,
it is not positedness, nor is it mediated,
but is immediate actuality; it has no ground.
Because this immediate actuality pertains also to the possible,
the latter is determined no less than the actual as contingent
and is likewise groundless.

But, second, the contingent is the actual
as what is only possible, or as a positedness;
thus the possible also, as formal in-itself, is only positedness.
Consequently, the two are both not in and for themselves
but have their immanent reflection in an other,
or they do have a ground.

The contingent thus has no ground because it is contingent;
and for that same reason it has a ground, because it is contingent.

It is the posited, immediate conversion of inner and outer,
or of immanently-reflected-being and being,
each into the other posited,
because possibility and actuality
both have this determination in them
by being moments of the absolute form.
So actuality, in its immediate unity with possibility,
is only concrete existence and is determined as groundless,
something only posited or only possible;
or, as reflected and determined over against possibility,
it is separated from possibility,
from immanent reflectedness,
and then, too, is no less
immediately only a possible.
Likewise possibility, as simple in-itself,
is something immediate,
only an existent in general;
or, opposed to actuality,
it equally is an in-itself
without actuality, only a possible,
but, for that very reason,
again only a concrete,
not immanently reflected,
existence in general.

This absolute restlessness of the becoming of
these two determinations is contingency.
But for this reason, because each determination
immediately turns into the opposite,
in this opposite each equally rejoins itself,
and this identity of the two,
of each in the other,
is necessity.

The necessary is an actual;
as such it is immediate, groundless;
but it equally has its actuality
through an other or in its ground
and is at the same time the positedness of this ground
and its reflection into itself;
the possibility of the necessary is a sublated one.
The contingent is therefore necessary
because the actual is determined as a possible;
its immediacy is consequently sublated
and is repelled into the ground or the in-itself,
and into the grounded, equally because its possibility,
this ground-grounded-connection,
is simply sublated and posited as being.
What is necessary is,
and this existent is itself the necessary.
At the same time it is in itself;
this immanent reflection is an other than that immediacy of being,
and the necessity of the existent is an other.
Thus the existent is not the necessary;
but this in-itself is itself only positedness;
it is sublated and itself immediate.
And so actuality, in that from which it is distinguished,
in possibility, is identical with itself.
As this identity, it is necessity.

