CHAPTER 2

Actuality

The absolute is the unity of inner and outer
as a first implicitly existent unit.
The exposition appeared as an external reflection
which, for its part, has the immediate
as something it has found,
but it equally is its movement
and the reference connecting it to the absolute
and, as such, it leads it back to the latter,
determining it as a mere "way and manner."
But this "way and manner" is the
determination of the absolute itself,
namely its first identity
or its mere implicitly existent unity.
And through this reflection, not only is
that first in-itself posited as essenceless determination,
but, since the reflection is negative self-reference,
it is through it that the in-itself becomes
a mode in the first place.
It is this reflection that,
in sublating itself in its determinations
and as a movement which as such turns back upon itself,
is first truly absolute identity
and, at the same time, the determining of
the absolute or its modality.
The mode, therefore, is the externality of the absolute,
but equally so only its reflection into itself;
or again, it is the absolute's own manifestation,
so that this externalization is its immanent reflection
and therefore its being in-and-for-itself.

So, as the manifestation that it is nothing,
that it has no content, save to be
the manifestation of itself,
the absolute is absolute form.
Actuality is to be taken as
this reflected absoluteness.
Being is not yet actual;
it is the first immediacy;
its reflection is therefore becoming
and transition into an other;
or its immediacy is not being-in-and-for-itself.
Actuality also stands higher than concrete existence.
It is true that the latter is the immediacy
that has proceeded from ground and conditions,
or from essence and its reflection.
In itself or implicitly, it is therefore
what actuality is, real reflection;
but it is still not the posited unity of reflection and immediacy.
Hence concrete existence passes over into appearance
as it develops the reflection contained within it.
It is the ground that has foundered to the ground;
its determination, its vocation, is to restore this ground,
and therefore it becomes essential relation,
and its final reflection is that its
immediacy be posited as immanent reflection and conversely.
This unity, in which concrete existence
or immediacy and the in-itself,
the ground or the reflected, are simply moments,
is now actuality.
The actual is therefore manifestation.
It is not drawn into
the sphere of alteration by its externality,
nor is it the reflective shining of itself in an other.
It just manifests itself,
and this means that in its externality,
and only in it, it is itself, that is to say,
only as a self-differentiating and self-determining movement.

Now in actuality as this absolute form,
the moments only are as sublated or formal, not yet realized;
their differentiation thus belongs at first to external reflection
and is not determined as content.

Actuality, as itself immediate form-unity of inner and outer,
is thus in the determination of immediacy
as against the determination of immanent reflection;
or it is an actuality as against a possibility.
The connection of the two to each other is the third,
the actual determined both as being reflected into itself
and as this being immediately existing.
This third is necessity.

But first, since the actual and the possible
are formal distinctions,
their connection is likewise only formal,
and consists only in this,
that the one just like the other
is a positedness, or in contingency.

Second, because in contingency
the actual as well as the possible
are a positedness,
because they have retained their determination,
real actuality now arises,
and with it also real possibility
and relative necessity.

Third, the reflection of relative necessity
into itself yields absolute necessity,
which is absolute possibility and actuality.

