C. RECIPROCITY OF ACTION

In finite causality it is substances
that actively relate to each other.
Mechanism consists in this externality of causality,
where the cause's reflection in its effect into itself
is at the same time a repelling being,
or where, in the self-identity which
the causal substance has in its effect,
the substance is equally immediately external to itself
and the effect is transposed into another substance.
In reciprocity of action this mechanism is now sublated,
for it contains first the disappearing of
that original persistence of immediate substantiality;
second, the coming to be of the cause,
and hence originariness mediating
itself with itself through its negation.

At first, the reciprocity of action takes on
the form of a reciprocal causality of substances
that are presupposed and that condition each other;
each is with respect to the other
both active and passive substance.
Since the two are thus passive and active at once,
their difference is thereby already sublated;
it is a totally transparent reflective shine;
they are substances only in being
the identity of the active and the passive.
The reciprocity of action is itself,
therefore, only a still empty way and manner,
and all that is still needed is merely
the external bringing together of what is already there,
both in itself and as posited.
First of all, it is no longer substrates
that are referred to each other but substances;
in the movement of conditional causality,
the still left over presupposed immediacy has been sublated,
and what conditions the causing activity is only an influence,
or its own passivity.
But this influence, moreover, does not come from
another substance originating it
but from precisely a causality
which is conditioned by influence,
or one which is mediated.
This at first external factor that accrues to the cause
and constitutes the side of its passivity is
therefore mediated through the causality itself,
is produced through its own activity
and is, consequently, a passivity
posited by its own very activity.
Causality is conditioned and conditioning.
As conditioning, it is passive;
but it is equally so as conditioned.
This conditioning or passivity is
the negation of the cause through itself
in that it makes itself essentially into an effect
and is cause precisely for that reason.
Reciprocity of action is, therefore, only causality itself;
the cause does not just have an effect
but, in the effect, refers as cause back to itself.

Causality has thereby returned to its absolute concept
and has at the same time attained the concept itself.
At first, it is real necessity, absolute self-identity
in which the difference between itand the determinations
referring to each other within it are substances,
free actualities, over against one another.
Necessity is in this way inner identity;
causality is the manifestation of it
in which its reflective shine of
substantial otherness has been sublated,
and necessity is elevated to freedom.
In the reciprocity of action,
originative causality displays itself
as arising from its negation, from passivity,
and as passing away into it, as a becoming,
but in such a way that this becoming is
at the same time equally only shining;
the transition into otherness is reflection-into-itself;
negation, which is the ground of the cause,
is its positive rejoining with itself.

In the reciprocity of action, therefore,
necessity and causality have disappeared;
they contain both the immediate identity
as combination and reference
and the absolute substantiality of the differences,
consequently their contingency,
the original unity of substantial difference
and therefore the absolute contradiction.
Necessity is being, because being is;
it is the unity of being with itself
that has itself as ground, but, conversely,
because this being has a ground, it is not being;
it is simply and solely reflective shining, reference or mediation.
Causality is this posited transition of original being,
of cause, into reflective shine or mere positedness,
and, conversely, of positedness into originariness;
but the identity itself of being and reflective shine
still is the inner necessity.
This inwardness or this in-itself sublates
the movement of causality;
the result is that the substantiality of the sides
that stand in relation is lost, and necessity unveils itself.
Necessity does not come to be freedom by vanishing
but in that its still only inner identity is manifested,
and this manifestation is the identical movement immanent to
the different sides,
the immanent reflection of shine as shine.
Conversely, contingency thereby
comes to be freedom at the same time,
for the sides of necessity,
which have the shape of independent, free actualities
that do not reflectively shine into each other,
are now posited as an identity,
so that now these totalities of immanent reflection,
in their differences, also shine as identical,
in other words, they are also posited as
only one and the same reflection.

No longer, therefore, does absolute substance
as self-differentiating absolute form
repel itself as necessity from itself,
nor does it fall apart as contingency
into indifferent, external substances,
but, on the contrary, it differentiates itself:
on the one hand, into the totality
(the heretofore passive substance)
which is at the origin,
as the reflection from internal determinateness,
as simple whole that contains its positedness within itself
and in this positedness is posited as self-identical;
this is the universal;
on the other hand, into the totality
(the hitherto causal substance)
which is the reflection,
equally from internal determinateness,
into the negative determinateness
which, just as the self-identical determinateness,
equally is the whole,
but posited as the self-identical negativity;
the singular.
But, because the universal is self-identical
only in that the determinateness that it holds within is sublated,
hence it is the negative as negative,
it immediately is the same negativity that singularity is.
And the singularity, because it equally is
the determinedly determined, the negative as negative,
immediately is the same identity that universality is.
This, their simple identity, is the particularity that,
from the singular, holds the moment of determinateness;
from the universal, that of immanent reflection,
the two in immediate unity.
These three totalities are therefore one and the same reflection
that, as negative self-reference, differentiates itself
into the other two totalities;
but as into a perfectly transparent difference,
namely into the determinate simplicity,
or into the simple determinateness,
which is their one same identity.
This is the concept,
the realm of subjectivity or of freedom.

