
CHAPTER 1

Concrete existence

Just as the principle of sufficient reason says
that whatever is has a ground,
or is something posited,
something mediated,
so there would also have to be
a principle of concrete existence saying
that whatever is, exists concretely.
The truth of being is to be,
not an immediate something,
but essence that has
come forth into immediacy.

But when it was further said
that whatever exists concretely
has a ground and is conditioned,
it also would have had to be said
that it has no ground and is unconditioned.
For concrete existence is the immediacy
that has come forth from the sublating
of the mediation that results
from the connection of ground and condition,
and which, in coming forth,
sublates this very coming forth.

Inasmuch as mention may be made here of
the proofs of the concrete existence of God,
it is first to be noted that besides
immediate being that comes first,
and concrete existence
(or the being that proceeds from essence)
that comes second, there is still a third being,
one that proceeds from the concept,
and this is objectivity.
Proof is, in general, mediated cognition.
The various kinds of being require or contain
each its own kind of mediation,
and so will the nature of the proof also vary accordingly.
The ontological proof wants to start from the concept;
it lays down as its basis the sum total of all realities,
where under reality also concrete existence is subsumed.
Its mediation, therefore, is that of the syllogism,
and syllogism is not yet under consideration here.
We have already commented above (Part 1, Section 1)
on Kant's objection to the ontological proof,
and have remarked that by concrete existence
Kant understands the determinate immediate existence
with which something enters into the context of total experience,
that is, into the determination of being an other
and of being in reference to an other.
As an existent concrete in this way,
something is thus mediated by an other,
and concrete existence is in general the side of its mediation.
But in what Kant calls the concept, namely,
something taken as only simply self-referring,
or in representation as such, this mediation is missing;
in abstract self-identity, opposition is left out.
Now the ontological proof would have
to demonstrate that the absolute concept,
namely the concept of God,
attains to a determinate existence, to mediation,
or to demonstrate how simple essence
mediates itself with mediation.
This is done by the just mentioned
subsumption of concrete existence
under its universal, namely reality,
which is assumed as the middle term
between God in his concept, on the one hand,
and concrete existence, on the other.
This mediation, inasmuch as it has the form of a syllogism,
is not at issue here, as already said.
However, how that mediation of
essence and concrete existence truly comes about,
this is contained in the preceding exposition.
The nature of the proof itself will be considered
in the doctrine of cognition.
Here we have only to indicate what pertains
to the nature of mediation in general.

The proofs of the existence of God
adduce a ground for this existence.
It is not supposed to be
an objective ground of the existence of God,
for this existence is in and for itself.
It is, therefore, solely a ground for cognition.
It thereby presents itself as a ground
that vanishes in the subject matter
that at first seems to be grounded by it.
Now the ground which is derived
from the contingency of the world
entails the regress of the latter
into the absolute essence,
for the accidental is that which is
in itself groundless and self-sublating.
In this way, therefore,
the absolute essence does indeed proceed
from that which has no ground,
for the ground sublates itself
and with this there also vanishes
the reflective shine of the relation
that was given to God,
that it is grounded in an other.
This mediation is therefore true mediation.
But the reflection involved
in that proof does not know
the nature of the mediation that it performs.
On the one hand, it takes itself
to be something merely subjective,
and it consequently distances
its mediation from God himself;
on the other hand, for that same reason
it also fails to recognize its mediating movement,
that this movement is in the essence itself
and how it is there.
The true relation of reflection consists
in being both in one:
mediation as such but, of course, at the same time
a subjective, external mediation,
that is to say, a self-external mediation
which in turn internally sublates itself.
In that other presentation, however,
concrete existence is given the false relation
of appearing only as mediated or posited.

So, on the other side, concrete existence also
cannot be regarded merely as an immediate.
Taken in the determination of an immediacy,
the comprehension of God's concrete existence
has been declared to be beyond proof
and the knowledge of it
an immediate consciousness only, a faith.
Knowledge should arrive at
the conclusion that it knows nothing,
and this means that it gives up its mediating movement
and the determinations themselves
that have come up in the course of it.
This is what has also occurred in the foregoing;
but it must be added that reflection,
by ending up with the sublation of itself,
does not thereby have nothing for result,
so that the positive knowledge of the essence
would then be an immediate reference to it,
divorced from that result and self-originating,
an act that starts only from itself;
on the contrary, the end itself,
the foundering of the mediation,
is at the same time the ground
from which the immediate proceeds.
In “zu Grunde gehen,” the German language unites,
as we remarked above,
the meaning of foundering and of ground;
the essence of God is said to be the
abyss (Abgrund in German) for finite reason.
This it is, indeed, in so far as
reason surrenders its finitude therein,
and sinks its mediating movement;
but this abyss, the negative ground,
is at the same time the positive ground
of the emergence of the existent,
of the essence immediate in itself;
mediation is an essential moment.
Mediation through ground sublates itself
but does not leave the ground standing under it,
so that what proceeds from it would be a posited
that has its essence elsewhere;
on the contrary, this ground is,
as an abyss, the vanished mediation,
and, conversely,
only the vanished mediation is
at the same time the ground
and, only through this negation,
the self-equal and immediate.

Concrete existence, then, is not to be taken here
as a predicate, or as a determination of essence,
of which it could be said in a proposition,
“essence exists concretely,” or “it has concrete existence.”
On the contrary, essence has passed over into concrete existence;
concrete existence is the absolute self-emptying of essence,
an emptying that leaves nothing of the essence behind.
The proposition should therefore run:
“Essence is concrete existence;
it is not distinct from its concrete existence.”
Essence has passed over into concrete existence
inasmuch as essence as ground
no longer distinguishes itself from itself as grounded,
or inasmuch as the ground has sublated itself.
But this negation is no less essentially its position,
or the simply positive continuity with itself;
concrete existence is
the reflection of the ground into itself,
its self-identity as attained in its negation,
therefore the mediation that has posited itself
as identical with itself and through that is immediacy.

Now because concrete existence is
essentially self-identical mediation,
it has the determinations of mediation in it,
but in such a way that the determinations are
at the same time reflected into themselves
and have essential and immediate subsistence.
As an immediacy which is posited through sublation,
concrete existence is negative unity and being-within-itself;
it therefore immediately determines itself
as a concrete existent and as thing.
