
B. THE CONSTITUTION OF THE THING OUT OF MATTERS

The transition of property into a matter
or into a self-subsistent stuff is the familiar
transition performed on sensible matter by chemistry
when it seeks to represent the properties of color, smell, etc.,
as luminous matter, coloring matter, odorific matter,
sour, bitter matter and so on;
or when it simply assumes others,
like calorific matter, electrical, magnetic matter,
in the conviction that it has thereby gotten hold
of properties as they truly are.
Equally current is the saying that
things consist of various matters or stuffs.
One is careful about calling these matters or stuffs “things,”
even though one will readily admit that,
for example, a pigment is a thing;
but I do not know whether luminous matter,
for instance, or calorific matter,
or electrical matter, etc., are called things.
The distinction is made between things and their components
without any exact statement as to whether these components also,
and to what extent, are things or perhaps just half-things;
but they are at least concretes in general.

The necessity of making the transition
from properties to matters,
or of assuming that the properties are truly matters,
has resulted from the fact that they are
what is the essential in things
and consequently their true self-subsistence.
At the same time, however,
the reflection of the property into itself
constitutes only one side of the whole reflection,
namely the sublation of the distinction
and the continuity of the property
(which was supposed to be a concrete existence for an other)
with itself.
Thinghood, as immanent negative reflection
and as a distinguishing that repels itself from the other,
has consequently been reduced to an unessential moment;
at the same time, however, it has further determined itself.

First, this negative moment has preserved itself,
for property has become a matter continuous with itself
and self-subsisting only inasmuch as
the difference of things has sublated itself;
thus the continuity of the property in the otherness
itself contains the moment of the negative,
and, as this negative unity,
its self-subsistence is at the same time
the restored something of thinghood,
negative self-subsistence versus
the positive self-subsistence of the stuff.

Second, the thing has thereby progressed
from its indeterminacy to full determinateness.
As thing in itself, it is abstract identity,
simple negative concrete existence,
or this concrete existence
determined as the indeterminate;
it is then determined through its properties,
by virtue of which it is supposed to be
distinguished from other things;
but, since through the property the thing is
rather continuous with other things,
this imperfect distinction is sublated;
the thing has thereby returned into itself
and is now determined as determined;
it is determined in itself or is this thing.

But, third, this turning back into itself,
though a self-referring determination,
is at the same time an unessential determination;
the self-continuous subsistence makes up
the self-subsistent matter
in which the difference of things,
their determinateness existing in and for itself,
is sublated and is something external.
Therefore, although the thing as this thing
is complete determinateness,
this determinateness is such
in the element of inessentiality.

Considered from the side of the movement of the property,
this result follows in this way.
The property is not only external determination
but concrete existence immediately existing in itself.
This unity of externality and essentiality repels itself from itself,
for it contains reflection-into-itself and reflection-into-other,
and, on the one hand, it is determination as simple,
self-identical and self-referring self-subsistent
in which the negative unity,
the one of the thing, is sublated;
on the other hand, it is this determination over against an other,
but likewise as a one which is reflected into itself
and is determined in itself;
it is, therefore, the matters and this thing.
These are the two moments of self-identical externality,
or of property reflected into itself.
The property was that by which things
were supposed to be distinguished.
Since the thing has freed itself of its
negative side of inhering in an other,
it has thereby also become free
from its being determined by other things
and has returned into itself
from the reference connecting it to the other.
At the same time, however, it is only the thing-in-itself
now become the other of itself,
for the manifold properties on their part
have become self-subsistent
and their negative connection
in the one of the thing is
now only a sublated connection.
Consequently, the thing is self-identical negation
only as against the positive continuity of the material.

The “this” thus constitutes the
complete determinateness of the thing,
a determinateness which is at the same time
an external determinateness.
The thing consists of self-subsistent matters
indifferent to the connection they have in the thing.
This connection is therefore only
an unessential linking of them,
the difference of one thing from another
depending on whether there is in it
a more or less of particular matters
and in what amount.
These matters overrun this thing,
continue into others,
and that they belong to this thing
is no restriction for them.
Just as little are they, moreover,
a restriction for one another,
for their negative connection is
only the impotent “this.”
Hence, in being linked together in it,
they do not sublate themselves;
they are as self-subsistent,
impenetrable to each other;
in their determinateness they refer only to themselves
and are a mutually indifferent manifold of subsistence;
the only limit of which they are capable is a quantitative one.
The thing as this is just their merely quantitative connection,
a mere collection, their “also.”
The thing consists of some quantum or other of a matter,
also of the quantum of another, and also of yet another;
this combination, of not having any combination
alone constitutes the thing.
