
CHAPTER 1

Concrete existence

Just as the principle of sufficient reason says
that whatever is has a ground,
or is something posited,
something mediated,
so there would also have to be
a principle of concrete existence saying
that whatever is, exists concretely.
The truth of being is to be,
not an immediate something,
but essence that has
come forth into immediacy.

But when it was further said
that whatever exists concretely
has a ground and is conditioned,
it also would have had to be said
that it has no ground and is unconditioned.
For concrete existence is the immediacy
that has come forth from the sublating
of the mediation that results
from the connection of ground and condition,
and which, in coming forth,
sublates this very coming forth.

Inasmuch as mention may be made here of
the proofs of the concrete existence of God,
it is first to be noted that besides
immediate being that comes first,
and concrete existence
(or the being that proceeds from essence)
that comes second, there is still a third being,
one that proceeds from the concept,
and this is objectivity.
Proof is, in general, mediated cognition.
The various kinds of being require or contain
each its own kind of mediation,
and so will the nature of the proof also vary accordingly.
The ontological proof wants to start from the concept;
it lays down as its basis the sum total of all realities,
where under reality also concrete existence is subsumed.
Its mediation, therefore, is that of the syllogism,
and syllogism is not yet under consideration here.
We have already commented above (Part 1, Section 1)
on Kant's objection to the ontological proof,
and have remarked that by concrete existence
Kant understands the determinate immediate existence
with which something enters into the context of total experience,
that is, into the determination of being an other
and of being in reference to an other.
As an existent concrete in this way,
something is thus mediated by an other,
and concrete existence is in general the side of its mediation.
But in what Kant calls the concept, namely,
something taken as only simply self-referring,
or in representation as such, this mediation is missing;
in abstract self-identity, opposition is left out.
Now the ontological proof would have
to demonstrate that the absolute concept,
namely the concept of God,
attains to a determinate existence, to mediation,
or to demonstrate how simple essence
mediates itself with mediation.
This is done by the just mentioned
subsumption of concrete existence
under its universal, namely reality,
which is assumed as the middle term
between God in his concept, on the one hand,
and concrete existence, on the other.
This mediation, inasmuch as it has the form of a syllogism,
is not at issue here, as already said.
However, how that mediation of
essence and concrete existence truly comes about,
this is contained in the preceding exposition.
The nature of the proof itself will be considered
in the doctrine of cognition.
Here we have only to indicate what pertains
to the nature of mediation in general.

The proofs of the existence of God
adduce a ground for this existence.
It is not supposed to be
an objective ground of the existence of God,
for this existence is in and for itself.
It is, therefore, solely a ground for cognition.
It thereby presents itself as a ground
that vanishes in the subject matter
that at first seems to be grounded by it.
Now the ground which is derived
from the contingency of the world
entails the regress of the latter
into the absolute essence,
for the accidental is that which is
in itself groundless and self-sublating.
In this way, therefore,
the absolute essence does indeed proceed
from that which has no ground,
for the ground sublates itself
and with this there also vanishes
the reflective shine of the relation
that was given to God,
that it is grounded in an other.
This mediation is therefore true mediation.
But the reflection involved
in that proof does not know
the nature of the mediation that it performs.
On the one hand, it takes itself
to be something merely subjective,
and it consequently distances
its mediation from God himself;
on the other hand, for that same reason
it also fails to recognize its mediating movement,
that this movement is in the essence itself
and how it is there.
The true relation of reflection consists
in being both in one:
mediation as such but, of course, at the same time
a subjective, external mediation,
that is to say, a self-external mediation
which in turn internally sublates itself.
In that other presentation, however,
concrete existence is given the false relation
of appearing only as mediated or posited.

So, on the other side, concrete existence also
cannot be regarded merely as an immediate.
Taken in the determination of an immediacy,
the comprehension of God's concrete existence
has been declared to be beyond proof
and the knowledge of it
an immediate consciousness only, a faith.
Knowledge should arrive at
the conclusion that it knows nothing,
and this means that it gives up its mediating movement
and the determinations themselves
that have come up in the course of it.
This is what has also occurred in the foregoing;
but it must be added that reflection,
by ending up with the sublation of itself,
does not thereby have nothing for result,
so that the positive knowledge of the essence
would then be an immediate reference to it,
divorced from that result and self-originating,
an act that starts only from itself;
on the contrary, the end itself,
the foundering of the mediation,
is at the same time the ground
from which the immediate proceeds.
In “zu Grunde gehen,” the German language unites,
as we remarked above,
the meaning of foundering and of ground;
the essence of God is said to be the
abyss (Abgrund in German) for finite reason.
This it is, indeed, in so far as
reason surrenders its finitude therein,
and sinks its mediating movement;
but this abyss, the negative ground,
is at the same time the positive ground
of the emergence of the existent,
of the essence immediate in itself;
mediation is an essential moment.
Mediation through ground sublates itself
but does not leave the ground standing under it,
so that what proceeds from it would be a posited
that has its essence elsewhere;
on the contrary, this ground is,
as an abyss, the vanished mediation,
and, conversely,
only the vanished mediation is
at the same time the ground
and, only through this negation,
the self-equal and immediate.

Concrete existence, then, is not to be taken here
as a predicate, or as a determination of essence,
of which it could be said in a proposition,
“essence exists concretely,” or “it has concrete existence.”
On the contrary, essence has passed over into concrete existence;
concrete existence is the absolute self-emptying of essence,
an emptying that leaves nothing of the essence behind.
The proposition should therefore run:
“Essence is concrete existence;
it is not distinct from its concrete existence.”
Essence has passed over into concrete existence
inasmuch as essence as ground
no longer distinguishes itself from itself as grounded,
or inasmuch as the ground has sublated itself.
But this negation is no less essentially its position,
or the simply positive continuity with itself;
concrete existence is
the reflection of the ground into itself,
its self-identity as attained in its negation,
therefore the mediation that has posited itself
as identical with itself and through that is immediacy.

Now because concrete existence is
essentially self-identical mediation,
it has the determinations of mediation in it,
but in such a way that the determinations are
at the same time reflected into themselves
and have essential and immediate subsistence.
As an immediacy which is posited through sublation,
concrete existence is negative unity and being-within-itself;
it therefore immediately determines itself
as a concrete existent and as thing.

A. THE THING AND ITS PROPERTIES

Concrete existence as a concrete existent is posited in
the form of the negative unity which it essentially is.
But this negative unity is at first only immediate determination,
hence the oneness of the something in general.
But the concretely existent something is different
from the something that exists immediately.
The former is essentially an immediacy that has arisen
through the reflection of mediation into itself.
The concretely existent something is thus a thing.

The thing is distinct from its concrete existence
just as the something can be distinguished from its being.
The thing and the concrete existent
are immediately one and the same.
But because concrete existence is not
the first immediacy of being
but has the moment of mediation within it,
its further determination as thing
and the distinguishing of the two is
not a transition but truly an analysis.
Concrete existence as such contains
this very distinction in the moment of its mediation:
the distinction of thing-in-itself
and external concrete existence.

a. The thing in itself and concrete existence

1. The thing in itself is the concrete existent
as the essential immediate that has resulted
from the sublated mediation.
Mediation is therefore equally essential to it;
but this distinction in this first
or immediate concrete existence
falls apart into indifferent determinations.
The one side, namely the mediation of the thing,
is its non-reflected immediacy,
and hence its being in general;
and this being, since it is
at the same time determined as mediation,
is an existence which is other to itself,
manifold and external within itself.
But it is not just immediate existence;
it also refers to the sublated mediation
and the essential immediacy;
it is therefore immediate existence
as unessential, as positedness.
(When the thing is differentiated
from its concrete existence,
it is then the possible,
the thing of representation,
or the thing of thought,
which as such is at the same time
not supposed to exist.
However, the determination of possibility
and of the opposition of the thing
and its concrete existence comes later.)
But the thing-in-itself and its mediated being are
both contained in the concrete existence,
and both are themselves concrete existences;
the thing-in-itself exists concretely
and is the essential concrete existence,
but the mediated being is
the thing's unessential concrete existence.

The thing in itself, as the simple reflectedness
of the concrete existence within itself,
is not the ground of unessential existence;
it is the unmoved, indeterminate unity,
for it has precisely the determination of
being the sublated mediation,
and is therefore the substrate of that existence.
For this reason reflection, too,
as an immediate existence
which is mediated through some other,
falls outside the thing-in-itself.
The latter is not supposed to have
any determinate manifold in it;
for this reason it obtains it only
when exposed to external reflection,
though it remains indifferent to it.
(The thing-in-itself has color
only when exposed to the eye,
smell when exposed to the nose, and so on.)
Its diversity consists of aspects
which an other picks out,
specific points of reference
which this other assumes
with respect to the thing-in-itself
and which are not the thing's own determinations.

2. Now this other is reflection
which, determined as external, is,
first, external to itself and determinate manifoldness.
Second, it is external to the essential concrete existent
and refers to it as to its absolute presupposition.
These two moments of external reflection,
its own manifoldness and its reference to
the thing-in-itself as its other,
are however one and the same.
For this concrete existence is
external only in so far as it refers to
the essential identity as to an other.
The manifoldness, therefore, does not have
an independent  subsistence of its own
besides the thing-in-itself
but, over against it,
it is rather only as reflective shine;
in its necessary reference to it,
it is like a reflex refracting itself in it.
Diversity, therefore, is present as the reference
of an other to the thing-in-itself;
but this other is nothing that subsists on its own
but is only as reference to the thing-in-itself;
but at the same time it only is in being repelled from it;
thus it is the unsupported rebound of itself within itself.

Now since the thing-in-itself is
the essential identity of the concrete existence,
this essenceless reflection does not accrue to it
but collapses within itself externally to it.
It founders to the ground
and thus itself comes to be essential identity
or thing-in-itself.
This can also be looked at in this way:
the essenceless concrete existence has
in the thing-in-itself its reflection into itself;
it refers to it in the first place as to its other;
but as the other over against that which is in itself,
it is only the sublation of its self,
and its coming to be in the in-itself.
The thing-in-itself is thus identical
with external concrete existence.

This is exhibited in the thing-in-itself as follows.
The thing-in-itself is self-referring
essential concrete existence;
it is self-identity only in so far as
it holds negativity's reflection in itself;
that which appeared as concrete existence
external to it is, consequently, a moment in it.
It is for this reason also self-repelling thing-in-itself
which thus relates itself to itself as to an other.
Hence, there are now a plurality of things-in-themselves
standing in the reciprocal reference of external reflection.
This unessential concrete existence is
their reciprocal relation as others;
but it is, further, also essential to them
or, in other words, this unessential concrete existence,
in collapsing internally, is thing-in-itself,
but a thing-in-itself which is other than the first,
for that first is immediate essentiality
whereas the present proceeds from
the unessential concrete existence.
But this other thing-in-itself is only an other in general;
for, as self-identical thing, it has no
further determinateness vis-à-vis the first;
like the first, it is the reflection within itself
of the unessential concrete existence.
The determinateness of the various things-in-themselves
over against one another falls therefore into external reflection.

3. This external reflection is henceforth a relating of
the things-in-themselves to one another,
their reciprocal mediation as others.
The things-in-themselves are thus
the extreme terms of a syllogism,
the middle term of which is made up
by their external concrete existence,
the concrete existence by virtue of which
they are other to each other and distinct.
This, their difference, falls only
in their connecting reference;
they send determinations, as it were,
from their surface into the reference,
while remaining themselves indifferent to it.
This relation now constitutes
the totality of the concrete existence.
The thing-in-itself is drawn into
a reflection external to it
in which it has a manifold of determinations;
this is the repelling of itself from itself
into another thing-in-itself,
a repelling which is its rebounding back into itself,
for each thing-in-itself is an other
only as reflected back from the other;
it has its supposition not in itself but in the other,
is determined only through the determinateness of the other;
this other is equally determined only
through the determinateness of the first.
But the two things-in-themselves,
since each has its difference
not in it but in the other,
are not therefore distinct things;
the thing-in-itself, in relating as it should to
the other extreme as to another thing-in-itself,
relates to it as to something non-distinguished from it,
and the external reflection that should constitute
the mediating reference between the extremes is a
relation of the thing-in-itself only to itself,
or is essentially its reflection within itself;
the reflection is, therefore,
determinateness existing in itself,
or the determinateness of the thing-in-itself.
The latter, therefore, does not have this determinateness
in a reference, external to it,
to another thing-in-itself,
and of this other to it;
the determinateness is not just its surface
but is rather the essential mediation of
itself with itself as with an other.
The two things-in-themselves that should
constitute the extremes of the reference,
since they are supposed not
to have any contrasting determinateness,
collapse in fact into one;
it is only one thing-in-itself that
relates itself to itself in the external reflection,
and it is its own reference to itself as to another
that constitutes its determinateness.

This determinateness of the thing-in-itself is
the property of the thing.

b. Property

Quality is the immediate determinateness of something;
the negative itself by virtue of which being is something.
The property of the thing is, for its part,
the negativity of reflection,
by virtue of which concrete existence
in general is a concrete existent
and, as simple self-identity, is thing-in-itself.
But the negativity of reflection, the sublated mediation,
is itself essentially mediation and reference,
though not to an other in general like quality
which is not reflected determinateness;
it is rather reference to itself as to an other,
or mediation which immediately is no less self-identity.
The abstract thing-in-itself is itself this relation
which turns from another back to itself;
it is thereby determined in itself;
but its determinateness is constitution,
which is as such itself determination,
and in relating to the other
it does not pass over into otherness
and is excluded from alteration.

A thing has properties;

these are, first, its determinate references to something other;
the property is there only as a way of reciprocal relating;
it is, therefore, the external reflection of the thing
and the side of its positedness.

But, second, in this positedness the thing is in itself;
it maintains itself in its reference to the other
and thus is admittedly only a surface
where the concrete existence is exposed to
the becoming of being and to alteration;
the property is not lost in this.
A thing has the property to effect this or that in an other,
and in this connection to express itself in some characteristic way.
It demonstrates this property only under the condition
that another thing has a corresponding constitution,
but at the same time the property is characteristically
the thing's own and its self-identical substrate;
for this reason this reflected quality is called property.
The thing thereby passes over into an externality,
but the property maintains itself in this transition.
Through its properties the thing becomes cause,
and to be a cause is this, to preserve itself as effect.
However, the thing is here still the static thing of many properties;
it is not yet determined as actual cause;
it is so far only the reflection of
its determinations immediately existing in itself,
not yet itself the reflection that posits them.

Essentially, therefore, the thing-in-itself has
just shown itself to be thing-in-itself
not only in such a way that its properties are
the positedness of an external reflection;
on the contrary, those properties are its own determinations
by virtue of which it relates in some determinate manner;
it is not an indeterminate substrate located on
the other side of its external concrete existence
but is present in its properties rather as ground,
that is to say, it is self-identity in its positedness;
but, at the same time, it is conditioned ground,
that is to say, its positedness is
equally reflection external to itself;
it is reflected into itself and in itself
only to the extent that it is external.
Through concrete existence the thing-in-itself
enters into external references,
and the concrete existence consists
precisely in this externality;
it is the immediacy of being
and because of that the thing is
subjected to alteration;
but it is also the reflected immediacy of the ground,
hence the thing in itself in its alteration.
This mention of the ground-connection is
not however to be taken here as if
the thing in general were determined
as the ground of its properties;
thinghood itself is, as such, the ground-connection;
the property is not distinguished from its ground,
nor does it constitute just the positedness
but is rather the ground that has
passed over into its externality
and is consequently truly reflected into itself;
the property is itself, as such,
the ground, implicitly existent positedness;
it is the ground, in other words,
that constitutes the form of the property's identity,
and the property's determinateness is
the self-external reflection of the ground;
the whole is the ground which in its repelling and determining,
in its external immediacy, refers itself to itself.
The thing-in-itself thus concretely exists essentially,
and that it concretely exists essentially means,
conversely, that concrete existence, as external immediacy,
is at the same time in-itselfness.

c. The reciprocal action of things

The thing-in-itself exists in concreto by essence;
external immediacy and determinateness
belong to its being-in-itself,
or to its immanent reflection.
The thing in-itself is thus a thing that has properties,
and hence there are a number of things distinct from one another,
not because of some viewpoint alien to them but through themselves.
These many diverse things stand in essential reciprocal action
by virtue of their properties;
the property is this reciprocal connecting reference itself,
apart from which the thing is nothing;
the reciprocal determination,
the middle term of the things-in-themselves
that are taken as extreme terms
indifferent to the reference connecting them,
is itself the self-identical reflection
and the thing-in-itself
which those extremes were supposed to be.
Thinghood is thus reduced to the
form of indeterminate self-identity
having its essentiality only in its property.
Thus, if one speaks of a thing
or of things in general without a determinate property,
then their difference is merely indifferent, quantitative.
What is considered as a thing can just as well be made into
a plurality of things or be considered as a plurality of things;
their separation or their union is an external one.
A book is a thing, and each of its pages is also a thing,
and equally so every tiny piece of its pages,
and so on to infinity.
The determinateness, in virtue of which
a thing is this thing only,
lies solely in its properties.
It is through them that the thing
differentiates itself from other things,
for the property is the negative reflection
and the differentiating;
only in its property, therefore, does the thing possess
in it the difference of itself from others.
This is the difference reflected into itself,
by virtue of which the thing, in its positedness,
that is, in its reference to others,
is equally indifferent to the other
and to its reference to it.
Without its properties, therefore,
there is nothing that remains to the thing
except the unessential compass
and the external gathering of an abstract in-itselfness.
With this, thinghood has passed over into property.

The thing, as the extreme term that exists in itself,
was supposed to relate to the property,
and this property to constitute the middle term
between things that stand connected.
But this connection is where the things meet
as self-repelling reflection,
where they are distinguished and connected.
This, their distinction and their connecting reference,
is one reflection and one continuity of both.
Accordingly, the things themselves fall only
within this continuity which is the property;
they vanish as would-be self-subsisting extremes
that would have a concrete existence outside this property.

The property, which was supposed to connect
the self-subsisting extremes,
is therefore itself self-subsistent.
The things are, on the contrary, the unessential.
They are something essential only as
the self-differentiating
and self-referring reflection;
but this is the property.
The latter is in the thing,
therefore, not as something sublated,
not just a moment of it;
on the contrary, the truth of the thing is
that it is only an unessential compass
which is indeed a negative unity,
but only like the one of the something,
that is to say, a one which is immediate.
Whereas earlier the thing was determined as
an unessential compass because it was made such
by an external abstraction that omits the property,
this abstraction now happens through the transition of
the thing-in-itself into the property itself.
But there is now an inversion of values,
for the earlier abstraction still envisaged
the abstract thing without its property
as being the essential,
and the property as an external determination,
whereas it is the thing as such which is now reduced,
through itself, to the determination of
an indifferent external form of the property.
The latter is henceforth thus freed of
the indeterminate and impotent bond
which is the unity of the thing;
the property is what constitutes
the subsistence of the thing;
it is a self-subsisting matter.
Since this matter is simple continuity with itself,
it only possesses at first the form of diversity.
There is, therefore, a manifold of
these self-subsisting matters,
and the thing consists of them.
