
CHAPTER 3

Being-for-itself

In being-for-itself,
qualitative being is brought to completion;
it is infinite being;
the being of the beginning is void of determination;
existence is sublated but only immediately sublated being;
it thus contains, to begin with,
only the first negation, itself immediate;
being is of course retained as well,
and the two are united in existence in simple unity;
for this reason, however,
each is in itself still unlike the other,
and their unity is still not posited.
Existence is therefore the sphere of differentiation,
of dualism, the domain of finitude.
Determinateness is determinateness as such;
being which is relatively, not absolutely, determined.
In being-for-itself, the distinction
between being and determinateness,
or negation, is posited and equalized.
Quality, otherness, limit, as well as reality,
in-itselfness, ought, and so forth, are the
incomplete configurations of negation in being
which are still based on the differentiation of the two.
But since in finitude negation has passed over into infinity,
in the posited negation of negation,
negation is simple self-reference
and in it, therefore, the equalization with being:
absolutely determinate being.

First, being-for-itself is immediately
an existent-for-itself, the one.

Second, the one passes over
into a multiplicity of ones,
repulsion or the otherness of the one
which sublates itself into its ideality, attraction.

Third, we have the alternating
determination of repulsion and attraction
in which the two sink into a state of equilibrium;
and quality, driven to a head in being-for-itself,
passes over into quantity.

A. BEING-FOR-ITSELF AS SUCH

The general concept of being-for-itself has come to light.
The justification for using the expression “being-for-itself”
for that concept would depend on showing that the representation
associated with the expression corresponds to the concept.
So indeed it appears to do.
We say that something is for itself
inasmuch as it sublates otherness,
sublates its connection and community with other,
has rejected them by abstracting from them.
The other is in it only as something sublated, as its moment;
being-for-itself consists in
having thus transcended limitation, its otherness;
it consists in being, as this negation,
the infinite turning back into itself.
In representing to itself an intended object
which it feels, or intuits, and so forth,
consciousness already contains in itself as consciousness
the determination of being-for-itself;
that is, it has in it the content of that object,
which is thus an idealization;
even as it intuits, or in general becomes
involved in the negative of itself, in the other,
it abides with itself.
Being-for-itself is the polemical,
negative relating to the limiting other
and, through this negation of the other,
is being-reflected-within-itself;
even though, side by side with this
immanent turning back of consciousness
and the ideality of its object,
the reality of this object is also retained,
for the object is at the same time
known as an external existence.
Consciousness is thus phenomenal,
or it is this dualism:
on the one side, it knows an external object
which is other than it;
on the other side, it is for-itself,
has this intended object in it as idealized,
abides not only by this other
but therein abides also with itself.
Self-consciousness, on the contrary, is
being-for-itself brought to completion and posited;
the side of reference to another,
to an external object, is removed.
Self-consciousness is thus the nearest
example of the presence of infinity;
granted, of a still abstract infinity,
but one which is of a totally different,
concrete determination than the
being-for-itself in general,
whose infinity still has only qualitative determinateness.

a. Existence and being-for-itself

As already mentioned, being-for-itself is
infinity that has sunk into simple being;
it is existence in so far as in the
now posited form of the immediacy
of being the negative nature of infinity,
which is the negation of negation,
is only as negation in general,
as infinite qualitative determinateness.
But in such a determinateness, wherein it is existence,
being is at once also distinguished
from this very being-for-itself
which is such only as infinite
qualitative determinateness;
nevertheless, existence is at the same time
a moment of being-for-itself,
for the latter certainly contains
being affected by negation.
So the determinateness which in existence as such is
an other, and a being-for-other,
is bent back into the infinite unity of being-for-itself,
and the moment of existence is present
in the being-for-itself as being-for-one.

b. Being-for-one

This moment gives expression to how the finite is
in its unity with the infinite or as an idealization.
Being-for-itself does not have negation in it as
a determinateness or limit,
and consequently also not as reference
to an existence other than it.
Although this moment is now being
designated as being-for-one,
there is yet nothing at hand for which it would be;
there is not the one of which it would be the moment.
There is in fact nothing of the sort
yet fixed in being-for-itself;
that for which something (and there is no something here)
would be, what the other side in general should be,
is likewise a moment,
itself only being-for-one,
not yet a one.
What we have before us, therefore,
is still an undistinguishedness of two sides
that may suggest themselves in the being-for-one;
there is only one being-for-another,
and since this is only one being-for-another,
it is also only being-for-one;
there is only the one ideality,
of that for which or in which
there should be a determination as moment,
and of that which should be the moment in it.
Being-for-one and being-for-itself do not therefore
constitute two genuine determinacies,
each as against the other.
Inasmuch as the distinction is momentarily assumed
and we speak of a-being-for-itself,
it is this very being-for-itself,
as the sublated being of otherness,
that refers itself to itself as to the sublated other,
is therefore for-one;
in its other it refers itself only to itself.
An idealization is necessarily for-one,
but it is not for an other;
the one, for which it is, is only itself.
The “I,” therefore, spirit in general,
or God, are idealizations,
because they are infinite;
as existents which are for-themselves, however,
they are not ideationally different
from that which is for-one.
For if they were different,
they would be only immediate,
or, more precisely, they would only be
existence and a being-for-another;
for if the moment of being for-one did
not attach to them,
it is not they themselves
but an other that would be
that which is for them.
God is therefore for himself,
in so far he is himself
that which is for him.

Being-for-itself and being-for-one are not, therefore,
diverse significations of ideality
but essential, inseparable, moments of it.

c. The one

Being-for-itself is the simple unity of
itself and its moments, of the being-for-one.
There is only one determination present,
the self-reference itself of the sublating.
The moments of being-for-itself have sunk into
an indifferentiation which is immediacy or being,
but an immediacy that is based on
the negating posited as its determination.
Being-for-itself is thus an existent-for-itself,
and, since in this immediacy its inner meaning vanishes,
it is the totally abstract limit of itself: the one.

Attention may be drawn in advance
to the difficulties that lie ahead
in the exposition of the development of the one,
and to the source of these difficulties.
The moments that constitute the concept of
the one as being-for-itself
occur in it one outside the other;
they are
(1) negation in general;
(2) two negations that are, therefore,
(3) the same,
(4) absolutely opposed;
(5) self-reference, identity as such;
(6) negative reference which is nonetheless self-reference.
These moments occur here apart because
the form of immediacy, of being, enters into
the being-for-itself as existent-for-itself;
because of this immediacy, each moment is posited
as a determination existent on its own,
and yet they are just as inseparable.
Hence, of each determination the opposite must equally be said;
it is this contradiction that causes the difficulty
that goes with the abstract nature of the moments.
