
B. THE ONE AND THE MANY

The one is the simple reference
of being-for-itself to itself
in which its moments have fallen together;
in which, therefore, being-for-itself has the form
of immediacy and its moments,
therefore, are now there as existents.
As the self-reference of the negative,
the one is a determining;
and, as self-reference,
it is infinite self-determining.
However, because of the present immediacy,
these distinctions are no longer only moments
of one and the same self-determination
but are at the same time posited as existents.
The ideality of the being-for-itself as a totality
thus turns at first into reality;
a reality, moreover, of the most
fixed and abstract kind, as a one.
In the one, the being-for-itself is
the posited unity of being and existence,
as the absolute union of the reference to another
and the reference to itself;
but also the determinateness of being
then enters into opposition to the determination
of the infinite negation, to self-determination,
so that what the one is in itself,
it is that now only in it,
and the negative consequently is
an other distinct from it.
What shows itself to be present
as distinct from the one is
the one's own self-determining;
its unity with itself, as thus distinct from itself,
is demoted to reference, and, as negative unity,
it is negation of itself as other,
the excluding of the one
as an other from itself,
from the one.

a. The one within

Within it, the one just is;
this, its being, is not an existence,
not a determination as reference to an other,
not a constitution;
it is rather its having
negated this circle of categories.
The one is not capable, therefore,
of becoming any other;
it is unalterable.
It is indeterminate,
yet no longer like being;
its indeterminateness is
the determinateness of self-reference,
absolutely determined being;
posited in-itselfness.
As negation which, in accordance with its concept,
is self-referring, it has distinction in it:
it directs away from itself towards another,
but this direction is immediately reversed,
because, according to this moment of self-determining,
there is no other to which it would be addressed,
and the directing reverts back to itself.
In this simple immediacy,
even the mediation of existence and ideality,
and with it all diversity and manifoldness,
have vanished.
In the one there is nothing;
this nothing, the abstraction of self-reference,
is here distinguished from the in-itselfness of the one;
it is a posited nothing, for this in-itselfness
no longer has the simplicity of the something,
but, as mediation, has rather the determination of being concrete;
taken in abstraction, it is indeed identical with the one,
but different from its determination.
So this nothing, posited as in the one,
is the nothing as the void.
The void is thus the quality of
the one in its immediacy.

b. The one and the void

The one is the void as the abstract self-reference of negation.
But the void, as nothing, is absolutely diverse
from the simple immediacy of the one,
from the being of the latter which is also affirmative,
and because the two stand in one single reference,
namely to the one, their diversity is posited;
however, as distinct from the affirmative being,
the nothing stands as void outside the one as existent.
Being-for-itself, determined in this way
as the one and the void,
has again acquired an existence.
The one and the void have their negative self-reference
as their common and simple terrain.
The moments of being-for-itself
come out of this unity,
become external to themselves;
for through the simple unity of the moments
the determination of being comes into play,
and the unity itself thus withdraws to one side,
is therefore lowered to existence,
and there it is confronted by its other determination
standing over against it, negation as such
and likewise as the existence of the nothing,
as the void.

c. Many ones

Repulsion

The one and the void constitute the first existence of being-for-itself.
Each of these moments has negation for its determination,
and is posited at the same time as an existence.
In accordance with this determination,
the one and the void are each the reference
of negation to negation as of an other to its other:
the one is negation in the determination of being; the void,
negation in the determination of non-being.
Essentially, however, the one
is only self-reference as referring negation,
that is, it is itself the same as the
void outside it is supposed to be.
Both are, however, also posited as
each an affirmative existence
(the one as being-for-itself as such,
the other as indeterminate existence in general)
and each as referring to the other as to an other existence.
Essentially, however, the being-for-itself of the one
is the ideality of the existence and of the other;
it does not refer to an other but only to itself.
But inasmuch as the being-for-itself is fixed as the one,
as existent for itself, as immediately present,
its negative reference to itself is
at the same time reference to an existent;
and since the reference is just as much negative,
that to which the being-for-itself refers remains
determined as an existence and as an other;
as essentially self-reference,
the other is not indeterminate negation like the void,
but is likewise a one.
The one is consequently a becoming of many ones.

Strictly speaking, however, this is not just a becoming;
for becoming is a transition of being into nothing;
the one, by contrast, becomes only a one.
The one, as referred to, contains
the negative as reference;
it has this reference, therefore, in it.
Hence, instead of a becoming,
the one's own immanent reference is,
first, present;
and, second, since this reference is negative
and the one is at the same time an existent,
the one repels itself from itself.
This negative reference of
the one to itself is repulsion.

This repulsion, as thus the positing of many ones
but through the one itself, is the one's
own coming-forth-from-itself,
but to such outside it as are themselves only ones.
This is repulsion according to the concept,
as it exists implicitly in itself.
The second repulsion is distinguished from it.
It is the one that first occurs to
the representation of external reflection,
not as the generation of ones
but only as the mutual holding off of ones
which are presupposed as already there.
To be seen now is how the first repulsion
that exists in itself determines itself
as the second, the external repulsion.

We must first establish the determinations
that the many ones have as such.
The becoming of the many, or their being produced,
immediately vanishes as the product of a positing;
what is produced are the ones, not for another,
but as infinitely referring to themselves.
The one repels only itself from itself;
it does not come to be but it already is;
that which is represented as the repelled is
equally a one, an existent;
repelling and being repelled applies
in like manner to both, and makes no difference.

The ones are thus presupposed
with respect to each other posited through
the repulsion of the one from itself;
presupposed, posited as non-posited;
their being-posited is sublated,
they are existents with respect to each other,
such as refer only to themselves.

Thus plurality appears not as an otherness,
but as a determination completely external to the one.
The one, in repelling itself, remains reference to itself,
just like that which is taken as repelled at the start.
That the ones are other to one another,
that they are brought together in
the determinateness of plurality,
does not therefore concern the one.
If the plurality were a
reference of the ones to one another,
the ones would then limit each other
and would have the being-for-other affirmatively in them.
Their connecting reference
(and this they have through their unity which is in itself),
as posited here, is determined as none;
it is again the previously posited void.
This void is their limit,
but an external limit in which
they are not supposed to be for one another.
The limit is that in which
the limited are just as much as are not;
but the void is determined as pure non-being,
and this alone constitutes the limit of the ones.

The repulsion of the one from itself is
the making explicit of what
the one is implicitly in itself;
but, thus laid out as one-outside-the-other,
infinity is here an infinity that has externalized itself,
and this it has done through the immediacy
of the infinite, of the one.
Infinity is just as much
the simple reference of the one to the one
as, on the contrary, the one's absolute lack of reference;
it is the former according to the simple affirmative reference
of the one to itself;
it is the latter according to the same reference as negative.
Or again, the plurality of the ones is
the one's own positing of the one;
the one is nothing but
the negative reference of the one to itself,
and this reference
[hence the one itself]
is the plural one.
But equally, plurality is utterly external to the one,
for the one is precisely the sublating of otherness;
repulsion is its self-reference and simple equality with itself.
The plurality of the ones is infinity as a contradiction
that unconstrainedly produces itself.
