SECTION III

Actuality

Actuality is the unity of essence and concrete existence;
in it, shapeless essence and unstable appearance
(subsistence without determination
and manifoldness without permanence)
have their truth.
Although concrete existence is the immediacy
that has proceeded from ground,
it still does not have form explicitly posited in it;
inasmuch as it determines and informs itself, it is appearance;
and in developing this subsistence that otherwise only is
a reflection-into-other into an immanent reflection,
it becomes two worlds, two totalities of content,
one determined as reflected into itself
and the other as reflected into other.
But the essential relation exposes
the formality of their connection,
and the consummation of the latter is
the relation of the inner and the outer
in which the content of both is equally
only one identical substrate
and only one identity of form.
This identity has come about also in regard to form,
the form determination of their difference is sublated,
and that they are one absolute totality is posited.

This unity of the inner and outer is absolute actuality.
But this actuality is, first, the absolute as such
(in so far as it is posited as a unity
in which the form has sublated itself)
making itself into the empty or external
distinction of an outer and inner.
Reflection relates to this absolute
as external to it;
it only contemplates it
rather than being its own movement.
But it is essentially this movement
and is, therefore, as the absolute's
negative turning back into itself.

Second, it is actuality proper.
Actuality, possibility, and necessity constitute
the formal moments of the absolute,
or its reflection.

Third, the unity of the absolute
and its reflection is
the absolute relation,
or rather the absolute as
relation to itself, substance.

CHAPTER 1

The absolute

The simple solid identity of the absolute is indeterminate,
or rather, every determinateness of essence and concrete existence,
or of being in general as well as of reflection,
has dissolved itself into it.
Accordingly, the determining of what is
the absolute appears to be a negating,
and the absolute itself appears only as
the negation of all predicates, as the void.
But since it must equally be spoken of
as the position of all predicates,
it appears as the most formal of contradictions.
In so far as that negating and this positing
belong to external reflection,
what we have is a formal, unsystematic dialectic
that has an easy time picking up
a variety of determinations here and there,
and is just as at ease demonstrating, on the one hand,
their finitude and relativity, as declaring, on the other,
that the absolute, which it vaguely envisages as totality,
is the dwelling place of all determinations,
yet is incapable of raising
either the positions or the negations
to a true unity.
The task is indeed to demonstrate what the absolute is.
But this demonstration cannot be either
a determining or an external reflection
by virtue of which determinations
of the absolute would result,
but is rather the exposition of the absolute,
more precisely the absolute's own exposition,
and only a displaying of what it is.

A. THE EXPOSITION OF THE ABSOLUTE

The absolute is not just being, nor even essence.
The former is the first unreflected immediacy;
the latter, the reflected immediacy;
further, each is explicitly a totality,
but a determinate totality.
Being emerges in essence as concrete existence,
and the connection of being and essence develops
into the relation of inner and outer.
The inner is essence, but as a totality
whose essential determination is
to be referred to being and to be being immediately.
The outer is being, but with the essential determination of
being immediately connected with reflection
and, equally, in a relationless identity with essence.
The absolute itself is the absolute unity of the two;
it is that which constitutes in general
the ground of the essential relation
which, as only relation, has yet
to return into this its identity
and whose ground is not yet posited.

It follows that the determination of
the absolute is to be absolute form,
but at the same time not as an identity
whose moments only are simple determinacies,
but, on the contrary, as an identity
whose moments are each explicitly the totality
and hence, indifferent with respect to the form,
the complete content of the whole.
But, conversely, the absolute is absolute content
in such a way that this content,
which is as such indifferent plurality,
explicitly has the negative connection of form
by virtue of which its manifold is
only one substantial identity.

Thus the identity of the absolute is
for this reason absolute identity,
because each of its parts is itself the whole
or each determinateness is the totality, that is,
because determinateness has become as such
a thoroughly transparent reflective shine,
a difference that has disappeared in its positedness.
Essence, concrete existence, the world existing in itself,
whole, parts, force:
these reflected determinations appear to representation
as true being valid in and for itself;
but against them the absolute is the ground
into which they have foundered.
Because in the absolute the form is
now only simple self-identity,
the absolute does not determine itself,
for the determination is a difference of form
which is valid as such from the start.
But because the absolute at the same time contains
every difference and form determination in general,
or because it is itself absolute form and reflection,
the difference of content must also come into it.
But the absolute itself is the absolute identity;
to be this identity is its determination,
for the manifoldness of the world-in-itself
and of the phenomenal world has all been sublated in it.
In the absolute itself there is no becoming,
since the absolute is not being;
nor does the absolute determine itself reflectively,
for it is not the essence which determines itself only inwardly;
and it also does not externalize itself,
for it is the identity of inner and outer.
But in this way the movement of reflection
stands over against its absolute identity.
The movement is sublated in this identity
and is thus only its inner;
but consequently its outer.

At first, therefore, the movement consists only
in sublating its act in the absolute.
It is the beyond of the manifold differences
and determinations and of their movement,
a beyond that lies at the back of the absolute.
It is thus the negative exposition of the absolute
earlier alluded to.
In its true presentation, this exposition is
the preceding whole of the logical movement
of the spheres of being and essence,
the content of which has not been gathered in
from outside as something given and contingent;
nor has it been sunk into the abyss of the absolute
by a reflection external to it;
on the contrary, it has determined itself within it
by virtue of its inner necessity,
and, as being's own becoming
and as the reflection of essence,
has returned into the absolute
as into its ground.

But this exposition has itself also a positive side,
for in foundering to the ground the finite demonstrates
that its nature is to be referred to the absolute,
or to contain the absolute within.
However, this side is not as much
the positive exposition of the absolute
as it is rather the exposition of the determinations,
namely that these have the absolute for their abyss,
but also for their ground,
or that that which imparts subsistence to them,
to their reflective shine, is the absolute itself.
Being as shine is not nothing but reflection,
reference to the absolute;
or it is a shine inasmuch as
that which shines in it is the absolute.
This positive exposition thus halts the finite
just before its disappearing:
it considers it an expression and
a copy of the absolute.
But this transparency of the finite
that lets only the absolute transpire through it
ends up in complete disappearance,
for there is nothing in the finite
which would retain for it a difference
over against the absolute;
as a medium, it is absorbed by
that through which it shines.

This positive exposition of the absolute is
therefore itself only a reflective shine,
for the true positive, that which contains
the exposition and the expounded content,
is the absolute itself.
Whatever the further determinations that may occur,
the form in which the absolute reflectively shines is
a nullity which the exposition gathers up from outside
and in which it gains for itself
a starting point for its activity.
Any such determination has in the absolute,
not its beginning but its end.
This expository process, therefore,
though it is an absolute act
because of its reference to
the absolute into which it returns,
is not so at its starting point
which is a determination
external to the absolute.

But in actual fact
the exposition of the absolute
is the absolute's own doing,
an act that begins from itself
and arrives at itself.
The absolute, only as absolute identity,
is absolute in a determined guise,
that is, as identical absolute;
it is posited as such by reflection
over against opposition and manifoldness;
or it is only the negative of
reflection and determination in general.
It is not just the exposition of the absolute
which is therefore something incomplete,
but this absolute itself
which is only arrived at.
Or again, the absolute
which is only as absolute identity
is only the absolute of an external reflection.
It is, therefore, not the absolutely absolute
but the absolute in a determination,
or it is attribute.

But the absolute is not attribute just because
it is the subject matter of an external reflection
and is consequently something determined by it.
Or, reflection is not only external to it;
but, precisely because it is external to it,
it is immediately internal to it.
The absolute is absolute only because
it is not abstract identity
but is the identity of being and essence,
or the identity of the inner and the outer.
It is therefore itself the absolute form
that makes it reflectively shine within itself
and determines it as attribute.

B. THE ABSOLUTE ATTRIBUTE

The expression which we have used, “the absolute absolute,”
denotes the absolute which in its form
has returned back into itself
or whose form is equal to its content.
The attribute is just the relative absolute,
a combination which only signifies the absolute
in a form determination.
For at first, before its complete exposition,
the form is only internally
or, which is the same, only externally;
it is at first determinate form in general
or negation in general.
But because form is at the same time
as the form of the absolute,
the attribute is the whole content of the absolute;
it is the totality which earlier appeared as a world,
or as one of the sides of the essential relation,
each of which is itself the whole.
But both worlds, the phenomenal world
and the world that exists in and for itself,
were supposed to be opposed
to each other in their essence.
Each side of the essential relation was
indeed equal to the other:
the whole as much as the parts,
the expression of force the same content
as force itself,
and the outer everywhere the same as the inner.
But these sides were at the same time
supposed each to have still
an immediate subsistence of its own,
the one side as existent immediacy
and the other as reflected immediacy.
In the absolute, on the contrary,
these different immediacies have been
reduced to a reflective shine,
and the totality that the attribute is
is posited as its true and single subsistence,
while the determination in which it is
is posited as unessential subsistence.

The absolute is attribute because,
as simple absolute identity,
it is in the determination of identity;
now to the determination as such
other determinations can be attached,
for instance, also that there are several attributes.
But because absolute identity has only this meaning,
that not only all determinations have been sublated
but that reflection itself has also sublated itself,
all determinations are thus posited in it as sublated.
Or the totality is posited as absolute totality.
Or again, the attribute has the absolute
for its content and subsistence
and, consequently, its form determination
by which it is attribute is also posited,
posited immediately as mere reflective shine;
the negative is posited as negative.
The positive reflective shine that
the exposition gives itself through the attribute
in that it does not take the finite in its limitation as
something that exists in and for itself
but dissolves its subsistence into the absolute
and expands it into attribute;
sublates precisely this, that the attribute is attribute;
it sinks it and its differentiating act
into the simple absolute.

But since reflection thus reverts
from its differentiating act
only to the identity of the absolute,
it has not at the same time
left its externality behind
and has not arrived at the true absolute.
It has only reached the
indeterminate, abstract identity,
which is to say, the identity
in the determinateness of identity.
Or, since reflection determines the
absolute into attribute as inner form,
this determining is something
still distinct from externality;
the inner determination does not
penetrate the absolute;
the attribute's expression,
as something merely posited,
is to disappear into the absolute.

The form by virtue of which
the absolute would be attribute,
whether it is taken as outer or inner,
is therefore posited as something null in itself,
an external reflective shine,
or a mere way and manner.

C. THE MODE OF THE ABSOLUTE

The attribute is first
the absolute in simple self-identity.
Second, it is negation,
a negation which is as such
formal immanent reflection.
These two sides constitute at first
the two extremes of the attribute,
the middle term of which is the attribute itself,
since it is both the absolute and the determinateness.
The second of these extremes is the negative as negative,
the reflection external to the absolute.
Or inasmuch as the negative is
taken as the inner of the absolute
and its own determination is to posit itself as mode,
it is then the self-externality of the absolute,
the loss of itself in the
changeability and contingency of being,
its having passed over into its opposite
without turning back into itself,
the manifoldness of form and content
determinations that lacks totality.

But the mode, the externality of the absolute, is not just this.
It is rather externality posited as externality,
a mere way and manner,
hence the reflective shine as reflective shine,
or the reflection of form into itself;
hence, the self-identity which is the absolute.
In actual fact, therefore, the absolute is first posited
as absolute identity only in the mode;
it is what it is, namely self-identity,
only as self-referring negativity,
as reflective shining which is posited as reflective shining.

Hence, in so far as the exposition of the absolute
begins from its absolute identity
and passes over to the attribute
and from there to the mode,
it has therein exhaustively run through its moments.

But first, in this course it does not just behave
negatively towards these determinations;
its act is rather the reflective movement itself,
and it is only as such a movement that
the absolute truly is absolute identity.

Second, the exposition does not thereby deal with mere externality,
and the mode is not only the most external externality.
Rather, since the mode is reflective shine as shine,
it is an immanent turning back, the self-dissolving reflection,
and it is in being this reflection that
the absolute is absolute being.

Third, the reflective act of exposition seems to begin
from its own determinations and from something external,
to take up the modes or even the determinations of the attribute
as if they were found outside the absolute
and its contribution were only to reduce them
to undifferentiated identity.
But it has in fact found the determinateness
from which it begins in the absolute itself.
For as first undifferentiated identity,
the absolute is itself only the determinate absolute,
or attribute, because it is the unmoved,
still unreflected absolute.
This determinateness, since it is determinateness,
belongs to the reflective movement,
and it is through this movement alone
that the absolute is determined as the first identity;
through it alone that it has absolute form
and does not just exist as self-equal
but posits itself as self-equal.

Accordingly the true meaning of mode is that
it is the absolute's own reflective movement;
it is a determining by virtue of which
the absolute would become, not an other,
but what it already is;
a transparent externality
which is a pointing to itself;
a movement out of itself,
but in such a way that being outwardly is
just as much inwardness,
and consequently equally a positing
which is not mere positedness
but absolute being.

When therefore one asks for a content of the exposition,
for what the absolute manifests,
the reply is that the distinction of form and content
in the absolute has been dissolved;
or that just this is the content of the absolute,
that it manifests itself.
The absolute is the absolute form
which in its diremption of itself is
utterly identical with itself,
is the negative as negative
or the negative that rejoins itself
and in this way alone is the absolute self-identity
which equally is indifferent towards its distinctions
or is absolute content.
The content is therefore only this exposition itself.

As this self-bearing movement of exposition,
as a way and manner which is
its absolute identity with itself,
the absolute is expression,
not of an inner,
nor over against an other,
but simply as absolute manifestation
of itself for itself.
Thus it is actuality.
