C. THE MODE OF THE ABSOLUTE

The attribute is first
the absolute in simple self-identity.
Second, it is negation,
a negation which is as such
formal immanent reflection.
These two sides constitute at first
the two extremes of the attribute,
the middle term of which is the attribute itself,
since it is both the absolute and the determinateness.
The second of these extremes is the negative as negative,
the reflection external to the absolute.
Or inasmuch as the negative is
taken as the inner of the absolute
and its own determination is to posit itself as mode,
it is then the self-externality of the absolute,
the loss of itself in the
changeability and contingency of being,
its having passed over into its opposite
without turning back into itself,
the manifoldness of form and content
determinations that lacks totality.

But the mode, the externality of the absolute, is not just this.
It is rather externality posited as externality,
a mere way and manner,
hence the reflective shine as reflective shine,
or the reflection of form into itself;
hence, the self-identity which is the absolute.
In actual fact, therefore, the absolute is first posited
as absolute identity only in the mode;
it is what it is, namely self-identity,
only as self-referring negativity,
as reflective shining which is posited as reflective shining.

Hence, in so far as the exposition of the absolute
begins from its absolute identity
and passes over to the attribute
and from there to the mode,
it has therein exhaustively run through its moments.

But first, in this course it does not just behave
negatively towards these determinations;
its act is rather the reflective movement itself,
and it is only as such a movement that
the absolute truly is absolute identity.

Second, the exposition does not thereby deal with mere externality,
and the mode is not only the most external externality.
Rather, since the mode is reflective shine as shine,
it is an immanent turning back, the self-dissolving reflection,
and it is in being this reflection that
the absolute is absolute being.

Third, the reflective act of exposition seems to begin
from its own determinations and from something external,
to take up the modes or even the determinations of the attribute
as if they were found outside the absolute
and its contribution were only to reduce them
to undifferentiated identity.
But it has in fact found the determinateness
from which it begins in the absolute itself.
For as first undifferentiated identity,
the absolute is itself only the determinate absolute,
or attribute, because it is the unmoved,
still unreflected absolute.
This determinateness, since it is determinateness,
belongs to the reflective movement,
and it is through this movement alone
that the absolute is determined as the first identity;
through it alone that it has absolute form
and does not just exist as self-equal
but posits itself as self-equal.

Accordingly the true meaning of mode is that
it is the absolute's own reflective movement;
it is a determining by virtue of which
the absolute would become, not an other,
but what it already is;
a transparent externality
which is a pointing to itself;
a movement out of itself,
but in such a way that being outwardly is
just as much inwardness,
and consequently equally a positing
which is not mere positedness
but absolute being.

When therefore one asks for a content of the exposition,
for what the absolute manifests,
the reply is that the distinction of form and content
in the absolute has been dissolved;
or that just this is the content of the absolute,
that it manifests itself.
The absolute is the absolute form
which in its diremption of itself is
utterly identical with itself,
is the negative as negative
or the negative that rejoins itself
and in this way alone is the absolute self-identity
which equally is indifferent towards its distinctions
or is absolute content.
The content is therefore only this exposition itself.

As this self-bearing movement of exposition,
as a way and manner which is
its absolute identity with itself,
the absolute is expression,
not of an inner,
nor over against an other,
but simply as absolute manifestation
of itself for itself.
Thus it is actuality.

