
C. RELATION OF OUTER AND INNER

1. The relation of whole and parts is the immediate relation;
in it, therefore, reflected and existent immediacy have
a self-subsistence of their own.
But now, since they stand in essential relation,
their self-subsistence is their negative unity,
and this is now posited in the expression of force;
the reflected unity is essentially a becoming-other,
the unity's translation of itself into externality;
but this externality is just as immediately
taken back into that unity;
the difference of the self-subsisting forces sublates itself;
the expression of force is only a mediation
of the reflected unity with itself.
What is present is only an empty
and transparent difference, a reflective shine,
but this shine is the mediation
which is precisely the independent subsistence.
What we have is not just opposite determinations
openly sublating themselves,
and their movement is not only a transition;
rather, what we have is both that
the immediacy from which the start
and the transition into otherness
were made is itself only posited,
and that, consequently, each of the determinations is
already in its immediacy the unity with its other,
so that the transition equally is
a self-positing turning back into itself.

The inner is determined as
the form of reflected immediacy
or of essence over against
the outer as the form of being;
the two, however, are only one identity.
This identity is, first,
the sustaining unity of the two
as substrate replete of content,
or the absolute fact with respect to which
the two determinations are indifferent, external moments.
To this extent, it is content and totality,
a totality which is an inner
that has equally become an outer
but, in this outer, is not something-that-has-become
or something-that-has-been-left-behind but is self-equal.
The outer, in this determination, is not only
equal to the inner according to content
but the two are rather only one fact.
But this fact, as simple identity with itself,
is different from its form determinations,
or these determinations are external to it;
it is itself, therefore, an inner
which is different from its externality.
But this externality consists in the two determinations,
the inner and the outer, both constituting it.
But the fact is itself nothing other
than the unity of the two.
Again, therefore, the two sides are
the same according to content.
But in the fact they are as self-penetrating identity,
as substrate full of content.
But in the externality, as forms of the fact,
they are indifferent to that identity
and consequently each is indifferent to the other.

2. They are in this wise the different form determinations
that have an identical substrate, not in them but in an other.
These are determinations of reflection
which are each for itself:
the inner, as the form of immanent reflection,
the form of essentiality;
the outer, as the form instead of
immediacy reflected into an other,
or the form of unessentiality.
But the nature of relation has shown that
these determinations constitute just one identity alone.
In its expression force is a determining
which is one and the same as presupposing
and as returning into itself.
Inasmuch as the inner and the outer are
considered as determinations of form,
they are, therefore,
first, only the simple form itself,
and, second, because in this form they are
at the same time determined as opposite,
their unity is the pure abstract determination
in which the one is immediately the other,
and is this other because it is the one that it is.
Thus the inner is immediately only the outer,
and it is this determinateness of externality
for the reason that it is the inner;
conversely, the outer is only an inner
because it is only an outer.
In other words, since the unity of form
holds its two determinations as opposites,
their identity is only this transition,
and is in this transition only the other of both,
not their identity replete with content.
Or this holding fast to form is in general
the side of determinateness.
What is determined according to this side is
not the real totality of the whole
but the totality or the fact itself
only in the determinacy of form;
since this unity is simply the coincidence
of two opposed determinations,
then when one of them is taken first
(it is indifferent which),
it must be said of the substrate or the fact
that it is for this reason just as essentially
in the other determinateness,
but also only in the other,
just as it was first said
that it is only in the first.

Thus something which is at first only an inner,
is for just that reason only an outer.
Or conversely something which is only an outer,
is for that reason only an inner.
Or if the inner is determined as essence
but the outer as being,
then inasmuch as a fact is only in its essence,
it is for that very reason only an immediate being;
or a fact which only is, is for that very reason
as yet only in its essence.
Outer and inner are determinateness
so posited that each, as a determination,
not only presupposes the other
and passes over into it as its truth,
but, in being this truth of the other,
remains posited as determinateness
and points to the totality of both.
The inner is thus the completion
of essence according to form.
For in being determined as inner,
essence implies that it is deficient
and that it is only with reference to
its other, the outer;
but this other is not just being,
or even concrete existence,
but is the reference to essence or the inner.
What we have here is not just
the reference of the two to each other,
but the determining element of absolute form,
namely that each term is immediately its opposite,
and each is their common reference
to a third or rather to their unity.
Their mediation, however, still misses
this identical substrate that contains them both;
their reference is for this reason
the immediate conversion of the one into the other,
and this negative unity tying them together is
the simple point empty of content.

3. The first of the identities considered,
the identity of inner and outer,
is the substrate which is indifferent
to the difference of these determinations
as to a form external to it,
or the identity is as content.
The second is the unmediated identity of their difference,
the immediate conversion of each into its opposite,
or it is inner and outer as pure form.
But both these identities are only
the sides of one totality,
or the totality itself is only the
conversion of the one identity into the other.
The totality, as substrate and content,
is this immediacy reflected into itself
only through the presupposing reflection
of form that sublates their difference
and posits itself as indifferent identity,
as reflected unity over against it.
Or again, the content is the form itself
in so far as the latter determines itself as difference
and makes itself into one side of this difference as externality,
but into the other side as an immediacy
which is reflected into itself,
or into an inner.

It follows that, conversely,
the differences of form,
the inner and the outer,
are each posited as the totality
within it of itself and its other;
the inner, as simple identity
reflected into itself, is immediacy
and hence, no less than essence,
being and externality;
and the external,
as the manifold and determined being,
is only external,
that is, is posited as unessential
and as having returned into its ground,
therefore as inner.
This transition of each into the other is
their immediate identity, as substrate,
but also their mediated identity, that is,
each is what it is in itself,
the totality of the relation,
precisely through its other.
Or, conversely, the determinateness of
either side is mediated through
the determinateness of the other
because each is in itself the totality;
the totality thus mediates itself with itself
through the form or the determinateness,
and the determinateness mediates
itself with itself through its simple identity.

Therefore, what something is, that it is
entirely in its externality;
its externality is its totality
and equally so its unity reflected into itself.
Its appearance is not only reflection-into-other
but immanent reflection,
and its externality is therefore
the expression of what it is in itself;
and since its content and its form
are thus absolutely identical,
it is, in and for itself, nothing but this:
to express itself.
It is the revealing of its essence,
and this essence, accordingly,
consists simply in being self-revealing.

The essential relation, in this identity
of appearance with the inner or with essence,
has determined itself as actuality.
