
B. THE MECHANICAL PROCESS

If objects are regarded only as self-enclosed totalities,
they cannot act on one another.
Regarded in this way, they are the same as the monads
which, precisely for that reason, were thought of
as having no influence on each other.
But the concept of a monad is for just this reason
a deficient reflection.
For, in the first place, the monad is
a determinate representation of its only implicit totality;
as a certain degree of development and positedness of its
representation of the world, it is determinate;
but since it is a self-enclosed totality,
it is also indifferent to this determinateness
and is, therefore, not its own determinateness
but a determinateness posited through another object.
In second place, it is an immediate in general,
for it is supposed to be just a mirroring;
its self-reference is therefore abstract universality
and hence an existence open to others.
It does not suffice, in order to gain the freedom of substance,
to represent the latter as a totality that,
complete in itself, would have nothing to receive from the outside.
On the contrary, a self-reference that grasps nothing conceptually
but is only a mirroring is precisely a passivity towards the other.
Likewise the determinateness, whether we now take it as
the determinateness of a being that exists or that mirrors,
as a degree of the monad's own internally generated development,
is something external;
the degree that the development achieves has its limit in an other.
To project the reciprocal influence of substances
into a predetermined harmony means nothing more
than to make it a presupposition,
in effect to remove it from the scope of the concept.
The need to avoid the interaction of substances was founded
on the moment of absolute self-subsistence
and originariness which was made a fundamental assumption.
But since the positedness, the degree of development,
does not correspond to this assumed in-itselfness,
it has for this reason its ground in an other.

In connection with the relation of substantiality,
we showed that it passes over into the relation of causality.
But now the existent no longer has the
determination of a substance but that of an object;
the causal relation has come to an end in the concept;
the originariness of one substance vis-à-vis another
has shown itself to be a reflective shine,
the substance's action a transition into the opposite substance.
This relation has therefore no objectivity.
Hence in so far as one object is posited
in the form of subjective unity, as efficient cause,
this no longer counts as an originary determination
but as something mediated;
the active object has this determination
only by means of another object.
Mechanism, since it belongs to the sphere of the concept,
has that posited within it which proved to be
the truth of the relation of causality, namely,
that the cause which is supposed to be something
existing in and for itself is in fact
effect just as well, positedness.
In mechanism, therefore,
the originary causality of the object is
immediately a non-originariness;
the object is indifferent to this
determination attributed to it;
that it is a cause is therefore
something accidental to it.
To this extent, it can be said
that the causality of substances is
only the product of representation.
But precisely this causality
as product of representation
is what mechanism is;
for mechanism is this,
that causality,
as identical determinateness of
a diversity of substances
and hence as the foundering into
this identity of their self-subsistence,
is mere positedness;
the objects are indifferent to this unity
and maintain themselves in the face of it.
But this also, their indifferent self-subsistence,
is a mere positedness,
and for this reason they are capable of
mixing and aggregating,
and as an aggregate of becoming one object.
Through this indifference both
to their transition and to their self-subsistence,
the substances are objects.

a. The formal mechanical process

The mechanical process is the positing of
that which is contained in the concept of mechanism,
hence the positing in the first place of a contradiction.

1. It follows from the just indicated concept
that the interaction of objects is
the positing of their identical connection.
This positing consists simply in giving to
the determinateness which is generated
the form of universality and this is communication,
which occurs without transition into the opposite.
Spiritual communication, which however takes place in
an element of universality in the form of universality,
is an idealized connection for itself,
one in which a determinateness continues undisturbed from
one person to another, generalizing itself unaltered,
like a scent freely spreading in the unresisting atmosphere.
But also in the communication between material objects
does their determinateness widen, so to speak,
in an equally idealizing manner;
personality is an infinitely more
intensive hardness than objects possess.
The formal totality of an object in general,
a totality indifferent to determinateness
and hence not a self-determination,
renders the object indistinct from another object
and thus makes interaction at first an unimpeded continuing
of the determinateness of the one into the other.

Now in the region of the spirit there is
an infinitely manifold content capable of communication,
for by being taken up into intelligence the content receives
this form of universality in which it becomes communicable.
But that which is a universal not only by virtue of form,
but in and for itself, is the objective as such,
both in the region of the spirit and of the body,
and as against it the singularity of
external objects, as of persons also,
is an unessential factor unable to offer
any resistance to it.
Laws, morals, rational conceptions in general,
are in the region of the spirit communicable entities of this kind;
they pervade individuals unconsciously imposing themselves on them.
In the region of the body, such entities are
motion, heat, magnetism, electricity, and the like,
all of which, even when one wants to imagine them
as stuffs or materials,
must be termed as imponderable agents,
for they lack that aspect of materiality
that grounds its singularization.

2. Now although in the interaction of objects
their identical universality is posited first,
it is equally necessary to posit
the other moment of the concept,
that of particularity;
the objects thus also demonstrate their self-subsistence;
they hold themselves outside each other,
and in that universality they produce singularity.
This production is reaction in general.
To begin with, this reaction is not to be conceived of
as a mere sublation of action
and of the communicated determinateness;
what is communicated is as
universal positively present in the particular objects
and particularizes itself only in their diversity.
To this extent, therefore, what is communicated
remains what it is, only distributed among
the objects or determined by their particularity.
the activity of the causal substance in its action;
but the active object only becomes a universal;
its action is from the start not a loss of its determinateness
but a particularization by virtue of which the object,
which was at first that whole determinateness present in it as single,
now becomes a species of it,
and the determinateness is thereby posited
for the first time as a universal.
The two, the raising in communication of
the singular determinateness into universality;
and the particularization of it in distribution,
the reduction of what was only a one to a species
are one and the same.

Now reaction is equal to action.
First, this is manifested by the other object
taking over the entire universal;
and so it is now active against the first.
Thus its reaction is the same as the action,
a reciprocal repulsion of the impulse.
Second, what is communicated is the objective;
it therefore remains the substantial determination of
the object on the presupposition of their diversity;
the universal thus at the same time specifies itself in them,
and consequently each object does not simply give back
the whole action but possesses its specific share.
But, third, reaction is a wholly negative action
in so far as each object,
because of the elasticity of its self-subsistence,
repels within it the positedness of an other
and retains its self-reference.
The specific particularity of the determinateness
communicated in the objects,
what was before called species,
returns to singularity,
and the object asserts its externality
as against the communicated universality.
The action thereby passes over into rest.
It proves to be only a superficial,
transient alteration within the self-enclosed
indifferent totality of the object.

3. This return constitutes the product of the mechanical process.
Immediately, the object is presupposed as a singular
then as a particular as against another particular;
but finally as indifferent towards its particularity,
as universal.
The product is the totality of the concept
previously presupposed but now posited.
It is the conclusion in which the communicated universal
is united with singularity through the particularity of the object.
In rest, however, the mediation is posited
at the same time as sublated;
or again, what is posited is
that the product is indifferent to this determining of it
and that the received determinateness is external in it.

Accordingly the product is the same as the object
that first enters the process.
But at the same time that object is
first determined through this movement;
the mechanical object is, as such,
an object only as product,
for what it is, is only by virtue of
the mediation of an other in it.
It is as product that it thus is
what it was supposed to be in and for itself,
a composite, a mixture, a certain arrangement of parts,
in general such that its determinateness is
not self-determination but something posited.

Yet the result of the mechanical process is
not already there ahead of that process itself;
its end is not in its beginning, as in the case of purpose.
The product is in the object a determinateness
which is externally posited in it.
Hence this product is indeed
according to its concept the same as
what the object already is at the beginning.
But at the beginning the external determinateness is
not yet there as posited.
The result is therefore something
quite other than the first existence of the object,
and is something utterly accidental for it.

b. The real mechanical process

The mechanical process passes over into rest.
That is to say, the determinateness that the object obtains
through that process is only an external one.
Just as external to it is this rest,
for although the latter is a determinateness
opposed to the activity of the object,
the two are each indifferent to the object.
Rest can also be viewed, therefore,
as brought about by an external cause,
just as much as it was indifferent to
the object to be active.
Now further, since the determinateness is a posited one,
and the concept of the object has gone back to itself
through the process of mediation,
the object contains the determinateness
as one that is reflected into itself.
Hence in the mechanical process the objects
and the process itself now
have a more closely determined relation.
They are not merely diverse,
but are determinedly differentiated as against one another.
Consequently the result of the formal process,
on the one hand a determinationless rest, is,
on the other hand, through
the immanently reflected determinateness,
the distribution among several objects
mechanically relating to one another
of the opposition which is in the object as such.
The object that on the one hand lacks all determination,
showing no elasticity and no self-subsistence in its relations,
has, on the other hand, a self-subsistence
impenetrable to other objects.
Objects now have also as against one another
this more determined opposition of
the self-subsistent singularity
and the non-self-subsistent universality.
The precise difference between any two may be
had merely quantitatively as a difference in
a body of diverse magnitudes of mass,
or of intensity, or in various other ways.
But in general the difference cannot be fixed
at just this abstract level;
also as objects, both are
positively self-subsistent.

Now the first moment of this real process is,
as before, communication.
The weaker can be seized and invaded
by the stronger only in so far as
it accepts the stronger and constitutes one sphere with it.
Just as in the material realm the weaker is
secured against the disproportionately strong
(as a sheet hanging freely in the air is
not penetrated by a musket ball;
a weak organic receptivity is not
as vulnerable to strong stimuli as it is to weak),
so is the wholly feeble spirit safer facing the strong
than one who stands closer to the strong.
Imagine, if you will, someone dull-witted and ignoble;
lofty intelligence will make no impression on such a one,
nor will nobility.
The one single effective defense against reason is
not to get involved with it at all.
To the extent that an object that has no standing of its own is
unable to make contact with one which is self-subsistent,
and no communication can take place between them,
the latter is also unable to offer resistance, that is,
cannot specify the communicated universal for itself.
If they were not in the same sphere,
their mutual connection would be an infinite judgment
and no process would be possible between them.
Resistance is the precise moment of
the overpowering of the one object by the other,
for it is the initial moment in
the distribution of the communicated universal
and in the positing of the self-referring negativity,
of the singularity to be established.
Resistance is overpowered when its determinateness is
not commensurate to the communicated universal
which the object has accepted
and which is supposed to be singularized in the latter.
The object's relative lack of self-subsistence is
manifested in the fact that its singularity lacks the capacity
for what is communicated to it
and is therefore shattered by it,
for it is unable to constitute itself
as subject in this universal,
cannot make the latter its predicate.
Violence against an object is
for the latter something alien
only according to this second aspect.
Power becomes violence when power, an objective universality,
is identical with the nature of the object,
yet its determinateness or negativity is
not the object's own immanent negative reflection
according to which the object is a singular.
In so far as the negativity of the object is not
reflected back into itself in the power,
and the latter is not the object's own self-reference,
the negativity, as against the power,
is only abstract negativity
whose manifestation is extinction.

Power, as objective universality and as violence against
the object is what is called fate.
a concept that falls within mechanism
in so far as fate is called blind,
that is, its objective universality is
not recognized by the subject in
its own specific sphere.
To add a few more remarks on the subject,
the fate of a living thing is in general the genus,
for the genus manifests itself through the fleetingness of
the living individuals that do not possess it as genus
in their actual singularity.
Merely animate natures, as mere objects,
like other things at lower levels
on the scale of being,
do not have fate.
What befalls them is a contingency;
however, in their concept as objects
they are self-external;
hence the alien power of fate is
simply and solely their own immediate nature,
externality and contingency itself.
Only self-consciousness has fate in a strict sense,
because it is free,
and therefore in the singularity of its “I”
it absolutely exists in and for itself
and can oppose itself to its objective universality
and alienate itself from it.
By this separation, however, it excites against itself
the mechanical relation of a fate.
Hence, for the latter to have violent power over it,
it must have given itself some determinateness or other
over against the essential universality;
it must have committed a deed.
Self-consciousness has thereby made itself into a particular,
and this existence, like abstract universality,
is at the same time the side open to
the communication of its alienated essence;
it is from this side that it is
drawn into the process.
A people without deeds is without blame;
it is wrapped up in objective, ethical universality,
is dissolved into it,
is without the individuality
that moves the unmoved,
that gives itself a determinateness on the outside
and an abstract universality separated
from the objective universality;
yet in this individuality the subject is also
divested of its essence,
becomes an object and enters into the relation of
externality towards its nature,
into that of mechanism.

c. The product of the mechanical process

The product of formal mechanism is
the object in general,
an indifferent totality
in which determinateness is as posited.
The object has hereby entered
the process as a determinate thing,
and, in the extinction of this process,
the result is, on the one hand, rest,
the original formalism of the object,
the negativity of its determinateness-for-itself.
But, on the other hand, it is
the sublation of the determinateness,
the positive reflection of it into itself,
the determinateness that has withdrawn into itself,
or the posited totality of the concept,
the true singularity of the object.
The object, determined at first
in its indeterminate universality,
then as particular, is now
determined as an objective singular,
so that in it that reflective semblance of singularity,
which is only a self-subsistence opposing itself
to the substantial universality,
is sublated.

This resulting immanent reflection,
the objective oneness of the objects,
is now a oneness which is an individual self-subsistence:
the center.

Secondly, the reflection of negativity is
the universality which is not a fate
standing over against determinateness,
but a rational fate, immanently determined,
a universality that particularizes itself from within,
the difference that remains at rest and fixed
in the unstable particularity of the objects
and their process;
it is the law.

This result is the truth,
and consequently also the foundation,
of the mechanical process.
