B. THE LIFE-PROCESS

In shaping itself inwardly, the living individual
comes into tension with its original presupposing
and, as a subject existing in and for itself,
sets itself in opposition to the presupposed objective world.
The subject is a purpose unto itself,
the concept that has its means and subjective reality
in the objectivity subjugated to it.
As such, it is constituted as the idea existing in and for itself
and as an essentially self-subsistent being,
as against which the presupposed external world
has the value only of something negative
and without self-subsistence.
In its self-feeling the living being
has the certainty of the intrinsic nullity
of the otherness confronting it.
Its impulse is the need to sublate this otherness
and to give itself the truth of this certainty.
At first the individual is, as subject,
only the concept of the idea of life;
its inner subjective process in which it feeds upon itself,
and the immediate objectivity which it posits as
a natural means in conformity with its concept,
are mediated by the process that refers to
the fully posited externality,
to the objective totality standing indifferently alongside it.

This process begins with need, that is,
the twofold moment of self-determination of the living being
by which the latter posits itself as negated
and thereby refers itself to an other than it,
to the indifferent objectivity,
but in this self-loss it is equally not lost,
preserves itself in it
and remains the identity of the self-equal concept.
The living being is thereby the impulse to posit
as its own this world which is other than it,
to posit itself as equal to it,
to sublate the world and objectify itself.
Its self-determination has therefore
the form of objective externality,
and since it is at the same time self-identical,
it is the absolute contradiction.
The immediate shape of the living being is
the idea in its simple concept,
the objectivity conforming to the concept;
as such the shape is good by nature.
But since its negative moment realizes itself
as an objective particularity,
that is, since the essential moments of its unity are
each realized as a totality for itself,
the concept splits into two,
becoming an absolute inequality with itself;
and since even in this rupture the concept remains absolute identity,
the living being is for itself this rupture,
has the feeling of this contradiction which is pain.
Pain is therefore the prerogative of living natures;
since they are the concretely existing concept,
they are an actuality of infinite power,
so that they are in themselves the negativity of themselves,
that this their negativity exists for them,
that in their otherness they preserve themselves.
It is said that contradiction cannot be thought;
but in the pain of the living being
it is even an actual, concrete existence.

This internal rupture of the living being,
when taken up into the simple universality of the concept,
in sensibility, is feeling.
From pain begin the need and the impulse
that constitute the transition by which the individual,
in being for itself the negation of itself,
also becomes for itself identity,
an identity which only is as the negation of that negation.
The identity which is in the impulse as such is
the individual's subjective certainty of itself,
in accordance with which it relates to the indifferent,
concrete existence of its external world as to an appearance,
to an actuality intrinsically void of concept and unessential.
This actuality is to obtain its concept
only through the subject,
which is the immanent purpose.
The indifference of the objective world to determinateness
and hence to purpose is what constitutes
its external aptitude to conform to the subject;
whatever other specifications there might be in it,
its mechanical determinability,
the lack of the freedom of the immanent concept,
constitute its impotence in preserving itself against the living being.
In so far as the object confronts the living being
at first as something external and indifferent,
it can affect it mechanically,
but without in this way affecting it as a living thing;
and in so far as it does relate to it as a living thing,
it does not affect it as a cause but it rather excites it.
Because the living being is an impulse,
externality impinges upon it and penetrates it
only to the extent that in principle it is already in it;
hence the effect on the subject consists only in that
the latter finds that the externality at its disposal accords with it.
And should this externality not accord with it as a totality,
then it must at least accord with a particular side of it
a possibility lodged in the very fact that,
in its relation to the outside,
the subject is a particular.

Now the subject, in so far as
in being determined in its need
it connects with the outside
and consequently is itself something external
or an instrument,
exercises violence over the object.
Its particular character, its finitude in general,
falls into the more determinate appearance of this relation.
The external factor in this is the process of
objectivity in general, mechanism and chemism.
But this same process is immediately interrupted
and the externality transformed into interiority.
The external purposiveness which is at first
elicited in the indifferent object
by the activity of the subject
is thereby sublated,
for as against the concept the object is not a substance:
the concept, therefore, cannot become for it just an external form
but must rather posit itself as its essence
and as the determinateness immanently pervading it
through and through in conformity with
the concept's original identity.

By seizing hold of the object,
the mechanical process passes over into an internal process
by which the individual appropriates the object
in such a manner that it takes away from it
its distinctive make-up, makes it into a means,
and confers upon it its own subjectivity as its substance.
This assimilation thus coincides with
the individual's process of reproduction considered above;
in this process the individual feeds on itself,
in the sense that it makes its own objectivity its object;
the mechanical and chemical conflict of its members
with external things is an objective moment of itself.
The mechanical and chemical factor in the process is
a beginning of the dissolution of the living thing.
Since life is the truth of these processes,
and as a living being it is therefore
the concrete existence of this truth
and the power over the processes,
it infringes upon the latter,
permeates them as their universality,
and their product is entirely determined by it.
This transformation of them into the living individual
constitutes the turning back of this individual into itself,
with the result that the production that
as such would be the transition into an other becomes reproduction,
a reproduction in which the living being posits itself
as self-identical for itself.

The immediate idea is also
the immediate identity of concept and reality
but one that does not exist for itself;
through the objective process,
the living being gives itself its feeling of self;
for in that process it posits itself
as it is in and for itself, namely,
as self-identical in an otherness
posited as indifferent to it,
as the negative unity of the negative.
The individual, in thus rejoining the objectivity
at first presupposed as indifferent to it,
has equally constituted itself as actual singularity
and has sublated its particularity,
raising it to universality.
Its particularity consisted in the disruption
whereby life posited the individual life
and the objectivity external to it as its species.
Through the external life-process,
it has consequently posited itself
as real universal life, as genus.

