
B. THE MEANS

The first immediate positing in purpose is
equally the positing of something internally determined,
that is, determined as posited, and, at the same time,
the presupposing of an objective world,
one indifferent to the determination of purpose.
But the subjectivity of purpose is
the absolutely negative unity;
its second determining is, therefore,
the sublation of this presupposition as such;
this sublation is an immanent turning back
inasmuch as that moment of the first negation
which is the positing of the negative over against the subject,
the external object, is sublated by it.
But as against the presupposition
or the immediacy of the determining,
as against the objective world,
it is as yet only the first,
itself immediate and hence external negation.
This positing is therefore not yet
the realized purpose itself
but only the beginning of this realization.
The object so determined is now the means.

Through a means the purpose unites with objectivity
and in objectivity unites with itself.
This means is the middle term of the syllogism.
Purpose is in need of a means for its realization,
because it is finite, in need of a means,
that is to say, of a middle term
that has at the same time the shape of an
external existence indifferent towards
the purpose itself and its realization.
The absolute concept has mediation
within itself in such a manner that
the first positing of it is not a
presupposition in whose object
the fundamental determination
would be an indifferent externality;
on the contrary, the world as creation has
only the form of such an externality;
it is its negativity and the positedness
that rather constitute its fundamental determination.
Accordingly, the finitude of purpose consists in this,
that its determining is as such external to itself;
accordingly, its first determining, as we have seen,
falls apart into a supposing and a presupposing;
the negation of this determining is therefore
only according to one side already immanent reflection;
according to the other side, it is rather only first negation.
Or again, the immanent reflection is itself also self-external
and a reflection outwards.

The means is therefore the
formal middle term of a formal syllogism;
it is something external to the extreme
of the subjective purpose as also,
therefore, to the extreme of the objective purpose;
just as particularity in the formal syllogism is
an indifferent medius terminus that can be replaced by others.
Moreover, just as this particularity is
a middle term by virtue of being
determinateness with reference to one extreme
but universality with reference to the other extreme,
and therefore obtains its mediating determination
by being related to an other,
so too the means is a mediating middle term
only because it is,
first, an immediate object,
and, second, because it is a means
by virtue of a reference
connecting it with the extreme
of purpose external to it,
a reference which is for it a form
to which it is indifferent.

Concept and objectivity, therefore,
are in the means only externally linked;
hence the means is only a merely mechanical object.
The reference of the object to purpose is
a premise or the immediate reference
which, as we have seen,
is with respect to purpose an immanent reflection;
the means is an inhering predicate;
its objectivity is subsumed under
the determination of purpose which,
on account of its concreteness, is universality.
Through this purposive determination present in it,
the means is now also subsumptive
with respect to the other extreme,
the at the moment still indeterminate objectivity.
Conversely, as contrasted with the subjective purpose,
the means has as immediate objectivity a universality of
existence which the subjective singularity of purpose still misses.
Thus, since purpose is in the means as
only an external determinateness at first,
it is itself, as the negative unity, outside the means;
the means, for its part, is a mechanical object
that possesses purpose only as a determinateness,
not as the simple concretion of totality.
But as the unifying means,
the middle term must itself be
the totality of the purpose.
It has been shown that the
determination of purpose is in the middle term
at the same time immanent reflection;
as this reflection, it is a formal self-reference,
since the determinateness is posited as real indifference,
as the objectivity of the middle term.
But precisely for this reason this subjectivity,
which is in one respect pure subjectivity,
is at the same time also activity.
In the subjective purpose the
negative self-reference is
still identical with determinateness as such,
with the content and the externality.
However, in the initial objectification of purpose
which is a becoming-other of the simple concept,
those moments come apart, each outside the other,
or, conversely, the becoming-other
or the externality itself consists in this coming apart.

This whole middle term is thus
the totality of the syllogism
in which the abstract activity
and the external means
constitute the extremes,
while the determinateness of
the object through the purpose,
by virtue of which it is a means,
constitutes the middle term.
But further, universality is
the connection of purposiveness and the means.
This means is object,
in itself the totality of the concept;
it does not have with respect to purpose
any of the power of resistance
that it initially has against
another immediate object.
To the purpose, therefore,
which is the posited concept,
it is utterly penetrable,
and it is receptive to this communication
because it is in itself identical with it.
But it is now also posited that
it is penetrable by the concept,
for in centrality it is an object
striving towards negative unity;
in chemism, too, whether as neutral or non-indifferent,
it is no longer self-subsistent.
Its non-self-subsistence consists
precisely in its being the
totality of the concept only implicitly;
but the concept is being-for-itself.
Consequently, with respect to purpose
the object has the character of being
powerless and of serving it;
purpose is the subjectivity or soul of the object
that has in the latter its external side.

The object, immediately subjected to purpose in this way,
is not an extreme of the syllogism;
on the contrary, this connection between the two
constitutes a premise of it.
But the means has also one side from which
it still has self-subsistence as against the purpose.
The objectivity which in the means is bound
with the purpose is still external to it,
because it is only immediately so connected;
and therefore the presupposition still persists.
The activity of the purpose through the means is
for that reason still directed against this presupposition,
and the purpose is activity,
no longer mere impulse and striving,
because in the means the moment of objectivity is
posited in its determinateness as something external,
and the simple unity of the concept now has
this objectivity as such within it.
