
CHAPTER 3

Teleology

Where there is the perception of a purposiveness,
an intelligence is assumed as its author;
required for purpose is thus the concept's
own free concrete existence.
Teleology is above all contrasted with mechanism,
in which the determinateness posited in the object,
being external, is one that gives no sign of self-determination.
The opposition between causæ efficientes and causæ finales,
between merely efficient and final causes,
refers to this distinction, just as,
at a more concrete level, the enquiry whether the absolute essence
of the world is to be conceived as blind mechanism
or as an intelligence that determines itself
in accordance with purposes also comes down to it.
The antinomy of fatalism, along with determinism,
and freedom is equally concerned with
the opposition of mechanism and teleology;
for the free is the concept in its concrete existence.

Earlier metaphysics has dealt with these concepts
as it dealt with others.
It presupposed a certain picture of the world
and strived to show that one or the other concept
of causality was adequate to it,
and the opposite defective because
not explainable from the presupposed picture,
all the while not examining the concept of
mechanical cause and that of purpose to see
which possesses truth in and for itself.
If this is established independently, it may turn out
that the objective world exhibits mechanical and final causes;
its actual existence is not the norm of what is true,
but what is true is rather the criterion for deciding
which of these concrete existences is its true one.
Just as the subjective understanding exhibits also errors in it,
so the objective world exhibits also aspects and stages of truth
that by themselves are still one-sided, incomplete,
and only relations of appearances.
If mechanism and purposiveness stand opposed to each other,
then by that very fact they cannot
be taken as indifferent concepts,
as if each were by itself a correct concept
and had as much validity as the other,
the only question being where
the one or the other may apply.
This equal validity of the two rests
only on the fact that they are,
that is to say, that we have them both.
But since they do stand opposed,
the necessary first question is,
which of the two concepts is the true one;
and the higher and truly telling question is,
whether there is a third which is their truth,
or whether one of them is the truth of the other.
But purposive connection has proved
to be the truth of mechanism.
Regarding chemism, what came under it
can be taken together with mechanism,
for purpose is the concept in free concrete existence,
and the concept's state of unfreedom,
its being sunk into externality,
stands opposed to it in any form.
Both, mechanism as well as chemism, are
therefore included under natural necessity:
mechanism, because in it the concept
does not exist in the object concretely,
for as mechanical the latter lacks self-determination;
chemism, either because the concept has in it
a one-sided concrete existence in a state of tension,
or because, emerging as the unity that creates
in the neutral object a tension of extremes,
it is external to itself in so far as it sublates this divide.

The closer the teleological principle is associated
with the concept of an extra-mundane intelligence,
and the more it has therefore enjoyed the favor of piety,
all the more it has seemed to depart from
the true investigation of nature,
which aims at a cognition of the properties of nature
not as extraneous, but as immanent determinacies,
and accepts only such cognition
as a valid conceptual comprehension.
Since purpose is the concept itself in its concrete existence,
it may seem strange that a cognition of objects
based on their concept rather appears as
an unjustified trespass into a heterogeneous element,
whereas mechanism, for which the determinateness
of an object is posited in it externally and by an other,
is accepted as a more immanent view of things than teleology.
Of course mechanism, at least the ordinary unfree mechanism,
and chemism as well, must be regarded as an immanent principle
in so far as the externally determining object
is itself again just another such object,
externally determined and indifferent to its being determined,
or, in the case of chemism, in so far as the other object
must likewise be one that is chemically determined;
in general, in so far as an essential moment
of the totality always lies in something external.
These principles remain confined, therefore,
within the same natural form of finitude;
but although they do not wish to transcend the finite
and, as regards appearances, lead only to finite causes
that themselves demand further causes,
they nonetheless equally expand themselves,
partly into a formal totality in the concept
of force, cause, or of such determinations of reflection
that are supposed to signify originariness, and partly,
through the medium of abstract universality,
also into a sum total of forces,
a whole of reciprocal causes.
Mechanism thus reveals itself to be a striving for totality
by the very fact that it seeks to comprehend nature by itself
as a whole that has no need of an other for its concept;
a totality that is not found in purpose
and the extra-mundane intelligence associated with it.

Now purposiveness presents itself from the first
as something of a generally higher nature,
as an intelligence that externally determines
the manifoldness of objects through a unity
that exists in and for itself,
so that the indifferent determinacies of the objects
become essential by virtue of this connection.
In mechanism they become so through the mere form of necessity
that leaves their content indifferent,
for they are supposed to remain external
and only the understanding as such is
expected to find satisfaction by recognizing
its principle of union, the abstract identity.
In teleology, on the contrary, the content becomes important,
for teleology presupposes a concept,
something determined in and for itself
and consequently self-determining,
and has therefore extracted from the connection of
differences and their reciprocal determinateness, from the form,
a unity that is reflected into itself,
something that is determined in and for itself
and is consequently a content.
But if this content is otherwise finite and insignificant,
then it contradicts what it is supposed to be,
for according to its form purpose is
a totality infinite within itself;
especially when the activity operating in accordance
with it is assumed to be an absolute will and intelligence.
For this reason has teleology drawn the
reproach of triviality so much upon itself,
for the purposes that it has espoused are,
as the case may be, more important or more trivial [than the content],
and it was inevitable that the connection of purposiveness
in objects would so often appear just a frivolity,
since it appears external and therefore contingent.
Mechanism, on the contrary, leaves to the determinacies of the objects,
as regards their content, their status as accidents indifferent to the object,
and these determinacies are not supposed to have,
whether for the objects or the subjective understanding,
any value higher than that.
This principle, combined with external necessity,
yields therefore a consciousness of infinite freedom
that contrasts with teleology,
which sets up as something absolute bits of its content
that are trivial and even contemptible,
where the more universal thought can only
find itself infinitely constricted,
even to the point of feeling disgust.

The formal disadvantage from which
this teleology immediately suffers
is that it only goes as far as external purposiveness.
The content of concept, since the latter is
thereby posited as something formal,
is for teleology also externally given to it
in the manifoldness of the objective world
in those very determinacies that
are also the content of mechanism,
but are there as something external and accidental.
Because of this commonality of content,
only the form of purposiveness constitutes by itself
the essential element of the teleological.
In this respect, without as yet considering
the distinction between external and internal purposiveness,
the connection of purpose in general has
proven itself to be the truth of mechanism.
Teleology possesses in general the higher principle,
the concept in its concrete existence,
which is in and for itself the infinite and absolute;
a principle of freedom which, utterly certain of its self-determination,
is absolutely withdrawn from the external determining of mechanism.

One of Kant's greatest services to philosophy was
in drawing the distinction between relative or
external purposiveness and internal purposiveness;
in the latter he opened up the concept of life, the idea,
and with that he positively raised philosophy
above the determinations of reflection
and the relative world of metaphysics,
something that the Critique of Reason does
only imperfectly, ambiguously, and only negatively.
We have remarked that the opposition of teleology and mechanism is
first of all the general opposition of freedom and necessity.
Kant treated the opposition in this form, among the antinomies of reason,
namely, as the third conflict of the transcendental ideas.
I cite his exposition, to which reference was made earlier,
very briefly because its essential point is so simple
that it does not need extensive explanation,
and moreover, the peculiarities of Kant's antinomies
have been elucidated in greater detail elsewhere.

The thesis of the antinomy now in question runs thus:
Causality according to the laws of nature is
not the only one from which the appearance of
the world can exhaustively be derived.
For their explanation, it is necessary to
assume yet another causality through freedom.

The antithesis: There is no freedom,
but everything in the world happens
solely according to laws of nature.

As in the other antinomies, the proof starts off apagogically
by assuming the opposite of each thesis;
secondly, in order to show the contradiction of this assumption,
its opposite (which is then the proposition to be proved)
is assumed in turn and presupposed as valid.
This whole roundabout proof could therefore be spared,
for the proof consists in nothing but the assertoric
assertion of the two opposite propositions.

Thus to prove the thesis we should first assume
that there is no other causality than
that according to the laws of nature, that is,
according to the necessity of mechanism in general, chemism being included.
This proposition contradicts itself,
because the law of nature consists just in this,
that nothing happens without a cause sufficiently determined a priori,
a cause that would have to contain an absolute spontaneity within it,
that is, the assumption opposed to the thesis is contradictory,
for the reason that it contradicts the thesis.

In support of the proof of the antithesis
we should assume that there is a freedom
as a particular kind of causality
for absolutely initiating a situation,
and together with it also a series of
consequences following upon it.
But now, since such a beginning presupposes
a situation that has no causal link with the one preceding it,
it contradicts the law of causality that alone makes the unity
of experience and experience in general possible;
that is, the assumption of the freedom
that is opposed to the antithesis cannot be made,
for the reason that it contradicts the antithesis.

We find in essence the same antinomy in
the Critique of the Teleological Judgement as
the opposition between the proposition that
every generation of material things happens
according to merely mechanical laws,
and the proposition that some cases
of generation of material things
are not possible according to such laws.
Kant's resolution of this antinomy is the same
as the general resolution of the rest,
namely that reason cannot prove
either the one or the other proposition
because we cannot have a priori
any determining principle of the possibility of things
according to merely empirical laws of nature;
further, that therefore the two propositions must be
regarded not as objective propositions but as subjective maxims;
that I ought to reflect on the events of nature every time
according to the principle of the mechanism of nature alone,
but that this does not prevent, when occasion permits,
following up certain natural forms in accordance with another maxim,
namely in accordance with the principal of final causes,
as if now these two maxims, which moreover are supposed to be
necessary only for human reason,
did not stand in the same opposition as
the two propositions in antinomy.
Missing in all this, as we remarked above,
is the one thing that alone is of philosophical interest,
namely the investigation of which of the two principles
has truth in and for itself.
On this standpoint, it makes no difference
whether the principles should be regarded as objective,
which means here, as externally existing
determinations of nature,
or as mere maxims of a subjective cognition;
what is subjective here is rather the
contingent cognition that applies one or the other maxim
as occasion demands, indeed, according to whether
it deems them fitting for given objects,
but for the rest does not ask about the truth
of these determinations themselves,
whether they both are determinations
of the objects or of cognition.

However unsatisfactory is for this reason Kant's discussion
of the teleological principle with respect to its essential viewpoint,
still worthy of note is the place that Kant assigns to it.
Since he ascribes it to a reflective faculty of judgment,
he makes it into a mediating link between
the universal of reason and the singular of intuition;
further, he distinguishes this reflective judgment
from the determining judgment, the latter one
that merely subsumes the particular under the universal.
Such a universal that only subsumes is an abstraction
that becomes concrete only in an other, in the particular.
Purpose, on the contrary, is the concrete universal
containing within itself the moment
of particularity and of externality;
it is therefore active and the impulse
to repel itself from itself.
The concept, as purpose, is of course an objective judgment
in which one determination, the subject,
namely the concrete concept, is self-determined,
while the other is not only a predicate but external objectivity.
But for that reason the connection of purpose is not
a reflective judgment that considers external objects
only according to a unity,
as though an intelligence had given them to us
for the convenience of our faculty of cognition;
on the contrary, it is the truth that exists in
and for itself and judges objectively,
determining the external objectivity absolutely.
The connection of purpose is therefore more than judgment;
it is the syllogism of the self-subsistent free concept
that through objectivity unites itself with itself in conclusion.

Purpose has resulted as the third
to mechanism and chemism;
it is their truth.
Inasmuch as it still stands
inside the sphere of objectivity
or of the immediacy of the total concept,
it is still affected by externality as such
and has an objective world over
against it to which it refers.
From this side, mechanical causality,
to which chemism is also in general to be added,
still makes its appearance in this purposive connection
which is the external one,
but as subordinated to it
and as sublated in and for itself.
As regards the more precise relation,
the mechanical object is, as immediate totality,
indifferent to its being determined and consequently,
conversely, to its being a determinant.
This external determinateness has now
progressed to self-determination
and accordingly the concept that
in the object was only inner
or, which amounts to the same,
only outer, is now posited;
purpose is, in the first instance,
precisely this concept which is
external to the mechanical object.
And so for chemism also, purpose is the self-determining
which brings the external determinateness conditioning it
back to the unity of the concept.
We have here the nature of the subordination of
the two preceding forms of the objective process.
The other, which in those forms lies in the infinite progress,
is the concept posited at first as external to them,
and this is purpose;
not only is the concept their substance
but externality is for them also
an essential moment constituting their determinateness.
Thus mechanical or chemical technique,
because of its character of being externally determined,
naturally offers itself to the connection of purpose,
which we must now examine more closely.
