A. ABSOLUTE GROUND

a. Form and essence

The determination of reflection,
inasmuch as this determination returns into ground,
is a first immediate existence in general
from which the beginning is made.
But existence still has only the meaning of positedness
and essentially presupposes a ground,
in the sense that it does not really posit a ground;
that the positing is a sublating of itself;
that it is rather the immediate that is posited,
and the ground the non-posited.
As we have seen, this presupposing is the positing
that rebounds on that which posits;
as sublated determinate being, the ground is not an indeterminate
but is rather essence determined through itself,
but determined as indeterminate or as sublated positedness.
It is essence that in its negativity is identical with itself.

The determinateness of essence as ground is thus twofold:
it is the determinateness of the ground and of the grounded.
It is, first, essence as ground,
essence determined to be essence
as against positedness, as non-positedness.
Second, it is that which is grounded,
the immediate that, however, is not anything in and for itself:
is positedness as positedness.
Consequently, this positedness is equally identical with itself,
but in an identity which is that of the negative with itself.
The self-identical negative and the self-identical positive
are now one and the same identity.
For the ground is the self-identity
of the positive or even also of positedness;
the grounded is positedness as positedness,
but this its reflection-into-itself is the identity of the ground.
This simple identity, therefore, is not itself ground,
for the ground is essence posited as
the non-posited as against positedness.
As the unity of this determinate identity (the ground)
and of the negative identity (the grounded),
it is essence in general distinct from its mediation.

For one thing, this mediation,
compared with the preceding reflections
from which it derives,
is not pure reflection,
which is undistinguished from essence
and still does not have the negative in it,
consequently also does not as yet contain
the self-subsistence of the determinations.
These have their subsistence, rather,
in the ground understood as sublated reflection.
And it is also not the determining reflection
whose determinations have essential self-subsistence,
for that reflection has foundered, has sunk to the ground,
and in the unity of the latter
the determinations are only posited determinations.
This mediation of the ground is thus
the unity of pure reflection and determining reflection;
their determinations or that which is posited has self-subsistence,
and conversely the self-subsistence of
the determinations is a posited subsistence.
Since this subsistence of the determinations is
itself posited or has determinateness,
the determinations are consequently distinguished
from their simple identity,
and they constitute the form as against essence.

Essence has a form and determinations of this form.
Only as ground does it have a fixed immediacy or is substrate.
Essence as such is one with its reflection,
inseparable from its movement.
It is not essence, therefore, through which
this movement runs its reflective course;
nor is essence that from which the movement begins,
as from a starting point.
It is this circumstance that above all makes
the exposition of reflection especially difficult,
for strictly speaking one cannot say
that essence returns into itself,
that essence shines in itself,
for essence is neither before its movement nor in the movement:
this movement has no substrate on which it runs its course.
A term of reference arises in the ground only following upon the
moment of sublated reflection.
But essence as the referred-to term is determinate essence,
and by virtue of this positedness it has form as essence.
The determinations of form, on the contrary,
are now determinations in the essence;
the latter lies at their foundation
as an indeterminate which in its determination
is indifferent to them;
in it, they are reflected into themselves.
The determinations of reflection should have
their subsistence in them and be self-subsistent.
But their self-subsistence is their dissolution,
which they thus have in an other;
but this dissolution is itself this self-identity
or the ground of the subsistence that they give to themselves.

Everything determinate belongs in general to form;
it is a form determination inasmuch as it is something posited
and hence distinguished from that of which it is the form.
As quality, determinateness is one with its substrate, being;
being is the immediate determinate,
not yet distinct from its determinateness
or, in this determinateness,
still unreflected into itself,
just as the determinateness is, therefore,
an existent determinateness,
not yet one that is posited.
Moreover, the form determinations of essence are,
in their more specific determinateness,
the previously considered moments of reflections:
identity and difference, the latter as both
diversity and opposition.
But also the ground-connection belongs among
these form determinations of essence,
because through it, though itself the
sublated determination of reflection,
essence is at the same time as posited.
By contrast, the identity that has the ground immanent in it
does not pertain to form, because positedness,
as sublated and as such (as ground and grounded),
is one reflection, and this reflection constitutes
essence as simple substrate which is the subsistence of form.
But in ground this subsistence is posited,
or this essence is itself essentially as determinate and, consequently,
is in turn also the moment of the ground-connection and form.
This is the absolute reciprocal connecting reference of form and essence:
essence is the simple unity of ground and grounded
but, in this unity, is itself determined, or is a negative,
and it distinguishes itself as substrate from form,
but at the same time it thereby becomes itself
ground and moment of form.

Form is therefore the completed whole of reflection;
it also contains this determination of reflection, that it is sublated;
just like reflection, therefore, it is one unity of its determining,
and it is also referred to its sublatedness,
to another that is not itself form but in which the form is.
As essential self-referring negativity,
in contrast with that simple negative,
form is positing and determining;
simple essence, on the contrary, is indeterminate and inert
substrate in which the determinations of form have their subsistence
or their reflection into themselves.
External reflection normally halts at
this distinction of essence and form;
the distinction is necessary,
but the distinguishing itself of the two is their unity,
just as this unity of ground is essence repelling itself from itself
and making itself into positedness.
Form is absolute negativity itself
or the negative absolute self-identity
by virtue of which essence is indeed not being but essence.
This identity, taken abstractly, is essence as against form,
just as negativity, taken abstractly as positedness,
is the one determination of form.
But this determination has shown itself to be in truth
the whole self-referring negativity
which within, as this identity, thus is simple essence.
Consequently, form has essence in its own identity,
just as essence has absolute form in its negative nature.
One cannot therefore ask, how form comes to essence,
for form is only the internal reflective shining of essence,
its own reflection inhabiting it.
Form equally is, within it,
the reflection turning back into itself
or the identical essence;
in its determining, form makes the determination
into positedness as positedness.

Form, therefore, does not determine essence,
as if it were truly presupposed, separate from essence,
for it would then be the unessential,
constantly foundering determination of reflection;
here it rather is itself the ground of its sublating
or the identical reference of its determinations.
That the form determines the essence means, therefore,
that in its distinguishing form sublates this very distinguishing
and is the self-identity that essence is
as the subsistence of the determinations;
form is the contradiction of being sublated in its positedness
and yet having subsistence in this sublatedness;
it is accordingly ground as essence which
is self-identical in being determined or negated.

These distinctions, of form and of essence,
are therefore only moments of the simple reference of form itself.
But they must be examined and fixed more closely.
Determining form refers itself to itself as sublated positedness;
it thereby refers itself to its identity as to another.
It posits itself as sublated;
it therefore presupposes its identity;
according to this moment, essence is the indeterminate
to which form is an other.
It is not the essence which is absolute reflection within,
but essence determined as formless identity:
it is matter.

b. Form and matter

Essence becomes matter in that its reflection is
determined as relating itself
to essence as to the formless indeterminate.
Matter, therefore, is the simple identity,
void of distinction, that essence is,
with the determination that it is the other of form.
Hence it is the proper base or substrate of form,
since it constitutes the immanent reflection
of the determinations of form,
or the self-subsistent term,
to which such determinations refer
as to their positive subsistence.

If abstraction is made from every determination,
from every form of a something, matter is what is left over.
Matter is the absolutely abstract.
(One cannot see, feel, etc. matter;
what one sees or feels is a determinate matter,
that is, a unity of matter and form.)
This abstraction from which matter derives is not, however,
an external removal and sublation of form;
it is rather the form itself which, as we have just seen,
reduces itself by virtue of itself to this simple identity.

Further, form presupposes a matter to which it refers.
But for this reason the two do not find themselves
confronting each other externally and accidentally;
neither matter nor form derives from itself, is a se,
or, in other words, is eternal.
Matter is indifferent with respect to form,
but this indifference is the determinateness
of self-identity to which
form returns as to its substrate.
Form presupposes matter for the very reason
that it posits itself as a sublated,
hence refers to this, its identity,
as to something other.
Contrariwise, form is presupposed by matter;
for matter is not simple essence,
which immediately is itself absolute reflection,
but is essence determined as something positive,
that is to say, which only is as sublated negation.
But, on the other hand, since form posits itself
as matter only in sublating itself,
hence in presupposing matter,
matter is also determined as groundless subsistence.
Equally so, matter is not determined as the ground of form;
but rather, inasmuch as matter posits itself as
the abstract identity of the sublated determination of form,
it is not that identity as ground,
and form is therefore groundless with respect to it.
Form and matter are consequently alike determined as
not to be posited each by the other,
each not to be the ground of the other.
Matter is rather the identity of
the ground and the grounded,
as the substrate that stands over
against this reference of form.
This determination of indifference that
the two have in common is
the determination of matter as such
and also constitutes their reciprocal reference.
The determination of form, that it is
the connection of the two as distinct,
equally is also the other moment of
the relating of the two to each other.
Matter, determined as indifferent,
is the passive as contrasted to form,
which is determined as the active.
This latter, as self-referring negative,
is inherently contradiction, self-dissolving,
self-repelling, and self-determining.
It refers to matter, and it is posited to refer to this matter,
which is its subsistence, as to another.
Matter is posited, on the contrary,
as referring only to itself
and as indifferent to the other;
but, implicitly, it does refer to the form,
for it contains the sublated negativity
and is matter only by virtue of this determination.
It refers to it as an other only
because form is not posited in it,
because it is form only implicitly.
It contains form locked up inside it,
and it is an absolute receptivity for form
only because it has the latter within it absolutely,
because to be form is its implicit vocation.
Hence matter must be informed,
and form must materialize itself;
it must give itself self-identity
or subsistence in matter.

2. Consequently, form determines matter,
and matter is determined by form.
Because form is itself absolute self-identity
and hence implicitly contains matter;
and equally because matter in its pure abstraction
or absolute negativity possesses form within it,
the activity of the form on the matter
and the reception by the latter of the form determination is only
the sublating of the semblance of their indifference and distinctness.
Thus the determination referring each to the other is
the self-mediation of each through its own non-being.
But the two mediations are one movement,
and the restoration of their original identity is
the inner recollection of their exteriorization.

First, form and matter presuppose each other.
As we have seen, this only means that the one essential unity is
negative self-reference, and that it therefore splits,
determined as an indifferent substrate in the essential identity,
and as determining form in essential distinction or negativity.
That unity of essence and form, the two opposed to each other as
form and matter, is the absolute self-determining ground.
Inasmuch as this unity differentiates itself,
the reference connecting the two diverse terms,
because of the unity that underlies them,
becomes a reference of reciprocal presupposition.

Second, the form already is, as self-subsisting,
self-sublating contradiction;
but it is also posited as in this way self-sublating,
for it is self-subsisting and at the same time
essentially referred to another,
and consequently it sublates itself.
Since it is itself two-sided, its sublating also has two sides.
For one, form sublates its self-subsistence
and transforms itself into something posited,
something that exists in an other,
and this other is in its case matter.
For the other, form sublates its determinateness vis-à-vis matter,
sublates its reference to it, consequently its positedness,
and it thereby gives itself subsistence.
Its reflection in thus sublating its positedness is
its own identity into which it passes over.
But since form at the same time externalizes this identity
and posits it over against itself as matter,
that reflection of the positedness into itself is
a union with a matter in which it obtains subsistence.
In this union, therefore, it is equally both:
is united with matter as with something other
(in accordance with the first side, viz. in that it makes
itself into a positedness),
and, in this other, is united with its own identity.

The activity of form by which matter is determined consists,
therefore, in a negative relating of the form to itself.
But, conversely, form thereby negatively relates itself to matter also;
the movement, however, by which matter becomes determined is
just as much the form's own movement.
Form is free of matter, but it sublates its self-subsistence;
but this, its self-subsistence, is matter itself,
for it is in this matter that it has its essential identity.
It makes itself into a positedness, but this is one and the same
as making matter into something determinate.
But, considered from the other side,
the form's own identity is at the same time externalized,
and matter is its other;
for this reason, because form sublates its own self-subsistence,
matter is also not determined.
But matter only subsists vis-à-vis form;
as the negative sublates itself, so does the positive also.
And as the form sublates itself, the determinateness of matter
that the latter has vis-à-vis form also falls away
the determinateness, namely, of being the indeterminate subsistence.

What appears here as the activity of form is, moreover,
just as much the movement that belongs to matter itself.
The determination that implicitly exists in matter,
what matter is supposed to be, is its absolute negativity.
Through it matter does not just refer to form simply as to an other,
but this external other is the form rather that
matter itself contains locked up within itself.
Matter is in itself the same contradiction that form contains,
and this contradiction, like its resolution, is only one.
But matter is thus in itself self-contradictory because,
as indeterminate self-identity,
it is at the same time absolute negativity;
it sublates itself within:
its identity disintegrates in its negativity
while the latter obtains in it its subsistence.
Since matter is therefore determined by form as by something external,
it thereby attains its determination,
and the externality of the relating, for both form and matter,
consists in that each, or rather in that the original unity of each,
in positing is at the same time presupposing:
the result is that self-reference is at the same time
a reference to the self as sublated or is reference to its other.

Third, through this movement of form and matter,
the original unity of the two is, on the one hand, restored;
on the other hand, it is henceforth a posited unity.
Matter is just as much a self-determining as
this determining is for it an activity of form external to it;
contrariwise, form determines only itself,
or has the matter that it determines within it,
just much as in its determining it relates itself to another;
and both, the activity of form and the movement of matter,
are one and the same thing, only that the former is an activity,
that is, it is the negativity as posited,
while the latter is movement or becoming,
the negativity as determination existing in itself.
The result, therefore, is the unity of the in-itself and positedness.
Matter is as such determined or necessarily has a form,
and form is simply material, subsistent form.

Inasmuch as form presupposes a matter as its other, it is finite.
It is not a ground but only the active factor.
Equally so, matter, inasmuch as it presupposes
form as its non-being, is finite matter;
it is not the ground of its unity with form
but is for the latter only the substrate.
But neither this finite matter nor the finite form have any truth;
each refers to the other, or only their unity is their truth.
The two determinations return to
this unity and there they sublate their self-subsistence;
the unity thereby proves to be their ground.
Consequently, matter is the ground
of its form determination not as matter
but only inasmuch as it is the absolute unity of essence and form;
similarly, form is the ground of the subsistence of its determinations
only to the extent that it is that same one unity.
But this one unity, as absolute negativity,
and more specifically as exclusive unity,
is, in its reflection, a presupposing;
or again, that unity is one act,
of preserving itself as positedness in positing,
and of repelling itself from itself;
of referring itself to itself as itself
and to itself as to another.
Or, the act by which matter is determined by form
is the self-mediation of essence as ground, in one unity:
through itself and through the negation of itself.

Informed matter or form that possesses subsistence is now,
not only this absolute unity of ground with itself,
but also unity as posited.
The movement just considered is the one
in which the absolute ground has exhibited
its moments at once as self-sublating
and consequently as posited.
Or the restored unity, in withdrawing into itself,
has repelled itself from itself and
has determined itself;
for its unity has been established through negation
and is, therefore, also negative unity.
It is, therefore, the unity of form and matter,
as the substrate of both, but a substrate which is determinate:
it is formed matter, but matter at the same time
indifferent to form and matter,
indifferent to them because sublated and unessential.
This is content.

c. Form and content

Form stands at first over against essence;
it is then the ground-connection in general,
and its determinations are the ground and the grounded.
It then stands over against matter,
and so it is determining reflection,
and its determinations are the determination of reflection itself
and the subsistence of the latter.
Finally, it stands over against content,
and then its determinations are again itself and matter.
What was previously the self-identical
at first the ground,
then subsistence in general,
and finally matter
now passes under the dominion of form
and is once more one of its determinations.

Content has, first, a form and a matter that
belong to it essentially; it is their unity.
But, because this unity is at the same time determinate
or posited unity, content stands over against form;
the latter constitutes the positedness
and is the unessential over against content.
The latter is therefore indifferent towards form;
form embraces both the form as such as well as the matter,
and content therefore has a form and a matter,
of which it constitutes the substrate
and which are to it mere positedness.

Content is, second, what is identical in form and matter,
so that these would be only indifferent external determinations.
They are positedness in general, but a positedness
that has returned in the content to its unity or its ground.
The identity of the content with itself is,
therefore, in one respect that identity which is indifferent to form,
but in another the identity of ground.
The ground has at first disappeared into content;
but content is at the same time the negative reflection of
the form determinations into themselves;
its unity, at first only the unity indifferent to form, is
therefore also the formal unity or the ground-connection as such.
Content, therefore, has this ground-connection as its essential form,
and, contrariwise, the ground has a content.

The content of the ground is therefore the ground
that has returned into its unity with itself;
the ground is at first the essence that in its
positedness is identical with itself;
as diverse from and indifferent to its positedness,
the ground is indeterminate matter;
but as content it is at the same time informed identity,
and this form becomes for this reason a ground-connection,
since the determinations of its oppositions are posited
in the content also as negated.
Content is further determined within,
not like matter as an indifferent in general,
but like informed matter,
so that the determinations of form have
a material, indifferent subsistence.
On the one hand, content is the essential self-identity
of the ground in its positedness;
on the other hand, it is posited identity
as against the ground-connection;
this positedness, which is in this identity as determination of form,
stands over against the free positedness, that is to say,
over against the form as the whole connection of ground and grounded.
This form is the total positedness returning into itself;
the other form, therefore, is only the positedness as immediate,
the determinateness as such.

The ground has thus made itself into a determinate ground in general,
and the determinateness is itself twofold:
of form first, and of content second.
The former is its determinateness of being external to the content as such,
the content that remains indifferent to this external reference.
The latter is the determinateness of the content that the ground has.
