
B. DETERMINATE GROUND

a. Formal ground

The ground has a determinate content.
For the form, as we have seen,
the determinateness of content is the substrate,
the simple immediate as against the mediation of form.
The ground is negatively self-referring identity which,
for this reason, makes itself into a positedness;
it negatively refers to itself because in its negativity
it is identical with itself;
this identity is the substrate or the content
which thus constitutes the indifferent
or positive unity of the ground-connection
and, in this connection, is the mediating factor.

In this content, the determinateness that
the ground and the grounded have over
against one another has at first disappeared.
The mediation, however, is also negative unity.
The negative implicit in that indifferent substrate is
this substrate's immediate determinateness through which
the ground has a determinate content.
But then, the negative is the negative reference of form to itself.
What has been posited sublates itself on its side
and returns to its ground;
the ground, however, the essential self-subsistence,
refers negatively to itself and makes itself into a positedness.
This negative mediation of ground and grounded is
the mediation that belongs to form as such, formal mediation.
Now both sides of form, because each passes over into the other,
thereby mutually posit themselves into one identity as sublated;
in this, they presuppose the identity.
The latter is the determinate content
to which the formal mediation thus refers itself
through itself as to the positive mediating factor.
That content is the identical element of both,
and because the two are distinct,
yet in their distinction each is
the reference to the other,
it is their subsistence,
the subsistence of each as the whole itself.

Accordingly, the result is that
in the determinate ground we have the following.
First, a determinate content is considered from two sides,
once in so far as it is ground,
then again in so far as it is grounded.
The content itself is indifferent to these forms;
it is in each simply and solely one determination.
Second, the ground is itself just as much a moment of form
as what is posited by it; this is its identity according to form.
It is a matter of indifference which of
the two determinations is made the first,
whether the transition is
from the one as posited to the other as ground
or from the one as ground to the other as posited.
The grounded, considered for itself, is the sublating of itself;
it thereby makes itself on the one side into a posited,
and is at the same time the positing of the ground.
The same movement is the ground as such;
it makes itself into something posited,
and thereby becomes the ground of something,
that is to say, is present therein
both as a posited and also first as ground.
That there be a ground, of that the posited is the ground,
and, conversely, the ground is thereby the posited.
The mediation begins just as much from the one as from the other;
each side is just as much ground as posited,
and each is the whole mediation or the whole form.
Further, this whole form is itself, as self-identical,
the substrate of the two determinations
that constitute the two sides of the ground and the grounded;
form and content are thus themselves one and the same identity.

Because of this identity of the ground and the grounded,
according both to content and form,
the ground is sufficient
(the sufficiency being limited to this relation);
there is nothing in the grounded which is not in the ground.
Whenever one asks for a ground,
one expects to see the same determination
which is the content doubled,
once in the form of that which is posited,
and again in the form of existence
reflected into itself, of essentiality.

Now inasmuch as in the determined ground,
the ground and the grounded are each the whole form, and their content,
though determinate, is nevertheless one and the same,
the two sides of the ground do not as yet have a real determination,
do not have a different content;
the determinateness is only one simple determinateness
that has yet to pass over into the two sides;
the determinate ground is present
only in its pure form, as formal ground.
Because the content is only this simple determinateness,
one that does not have in it the form of the ground-connection,
the determinateness is a self-identical content indifferent to form,
and the form is external to it;
the content is other than the form.

b. Real ground

The determinateness of ground is, as we have seen,
on the one hand determinateness of the substrate
or content determination;
on the other hand,
it is the otherness in the ground-connection itself,
namely the distinctness of its content and the form;
the connection of ground and grounded strays
in the content as an external form,
and the content is indifferent to these determinations.
But in fact the two are not external to each other;
for this is what the content is:
to be the identity of the ground
with itself in the grounded,
and of the grounded in the ground.
The side of the ground
has shown itself to be itself a posited,
and the side of the grounded to be
itself ground;
each side is this identity of the whole within it.
But since they equally belong to form
and constitute its determinate difference,
each is in its determinateness the identity of the whole with itself.
Consequently, each has a diverse content as against the other.
Or, considering the matter from the side of the content,
since the latter is the self-identity of the ground-connection,
it essentially possesses this difference of form within,
and is as ground something other than what it is as grounded.

Now the moment ground and grounded have a diverse content,
the ground-connection has ceased to be a formal one;
the turning back to the ground and
the procession forward from ground to posited
is no longer a tautology; the ground is realized.
Henceforth, whenever we ask for a ground,
we actually demand another content determination for it
than the determination of the content whose ground we are asking for.

This connection now determines itself further.
For inasmuch as its two sides are of different content,
they are indifferent to each other;
each is an immediate, self-identical determination.
Moreover, as referred to each other as ground and grounded,
the ground reflects itself in the other,
as in something posited by it, back to itself;
the content on the side of the ground,
therefore, is equally in the grounded;
the latter, as the posited, has its
self-identity and subsistence only in the ground.
But besides this content of the ground,
the grounded also now possesses a content of its own
and is accordingly the unity of a twofold content.
Now this unity, as the unity of sides that are different,
is indeed their negative unity;
but since the two determinations of content are indifferent to each other,
that unity is only their empty reference to each other,
in itself void of content, and not their mediation;
it is a one or a something externally holding them together.

In the real grounding connection
there is present, therefore, a twofold.
For one thing, the content determination which is ground
extends continuously into the positedness,
so that it constitutes the simple identity
of the ground and the grounded;
the grounded thus contains the ground
fully within itself;
their connection is one of
undifferentiated essential compactness.
Anything else in the grounded
added to this simple essence is,
therefore, only an unessential form,
external determinations of the content
that, as such, are free from the ground
and constitute an immediate manifold.
Of this unessential more, therefore,
the essential is not the ground,
nor is it the ground of any connection
between it and the unessential in the grounded.
The unessential is a positively identical element
that resides in the grounded but does not posit itself
there in any distinctive form;
as self-referring content, it is rather
an indifferent positive substrate.
For another thing, that which in the something is
linked with this substrate is an indifferent content,
but as the unessential side.
The main thing is the connection of the substrate
and the unessential manifold.
But this connection, since the determinations
that it connects are an indifferent content,
is also not a ground;
true, one determination is determined as essential content
and the other as only unessential or as posited;
but this form is to each, as a self-referring content, an external one.
The one of the something that constitutes their connection is
for this reason not a reference of form,
but only an external tie that does not hold
the unessential manifold content as posited;
it too is therefore likewise only a substrate.

Ground, in determining itself as real,
because of the diversity of the content
that constitutes its reality,
thus breaks down into external determinations.
The two connections of the essential reality content,
as the simple immediate identity of ground and grounded;
and then the something connecting distinct contents
are two different substrates.
The self-identical form of ground,
according to which one and the same thing
is at one time the essential
and at another the posited, has vanished.
The ground-connection has thus become external to itself.

Consequently, it is an external ground that now
holds together a diversified content
and determines what is ground and what is posited by it;
this determination is not to be found in the two-sided content itself.
The real ground is therefore the reference to another,
on the one hand, of a content to another content
and, on the other, of the ground-connection itself
(the form) to another, namely to an immediate,
to something not posited by it.

c. Complete ground

1. In real ground, ground as content
and ground as connection are only substrates.
The former is only posited as essential and as ground;
the connection is what the grounded immediately is
as the indeterminate substrate of a diversified content,
a linking of this content which is not the content's own reflection
but is rather external and consequently a reflection which is only posited.
The real ground-connection is ground, therefore, rather as sublated;
consequently, it rather makes up the side of
the grounded or of the positedness.
As positedness, however, the ground itself
has now returned to its ground;
it is now something grounded: it has another ground.
This ground will therefore be so determined that,
first, it is identical with the ground by which it is grounded;
both sides have in this determination one and the same content;
the two content determinations and their linkage in
a something are equally to be found in the new ground.
But, second, the new ground into which
the previously merely posited and external link
is now sublated is the immanent reflection of this link:
the absolute reference of the two content determinations to each other.

Because real ground has itself thus returned to its ground,
the identity of ground and grounded
or the formality of ground reasserts itself in it.
The newly arisen ground-connection is
therefore the one which is complete,
which contains the formal and real ground in itself
at the same time and mediates the content determinations
which in the real ground confronted each other immediately.

2. Thus the ground-connection has more precisely
determined itself as follows.

First, something has a ground;
it contains the content determination which is the ground
and, in addition, a second determination as posited by the ground.
But, because of the indifference of content,
the one determination is not ground in itself,
nor is the other in itself one that is grounded by the first;
this connection of ground and grounded is rather
sublated in the immediacy of their content, is posited,
and as such has its ground in another such connection.

Since this second connection is
distinguished only according to form,
it has the same content as the first;
it still has the same two determinations of content
but is now their immediate linking together.
This linking, however, is of a general nature,
and the content, therefore, is diversified into determinations
that are indifferent to each other.
The linking is not, therefore, their true absolute connection
that would make one determination the element of
self-identity in the positedness,
and the other determination
the positedness of this same self-identity;
on the contrary, the two are supported by a something
and this something is what connects them,
but in a connection which is not reflected,
is rather only immediate and, therefore,
only a relative ground as against
the linking in the other something.
The two somethings are therefore the two distinct
connections of content that have transpired.
They stand in the identical ground-connection of form;
they are one and the same whole content,
namely the two content determinations and their connection;
they are distinct only by the kind of this connection,
which in the one is an immediate
and in the other a posited connection;
through this, they are distinguished
one from another as ground and grounded only according to form.
Second, this ground-connection is not only formal, but also real.
Formal ground passes over into real ground, as has been shown;
the moments of the form reflect themselves into themselves;
they are a self-subsistent content,
and the ground-connection contains
also one content with the character of ground
and another with that of grounded.
The content constitutes at first the immediate
identity of both sides of the formal ground;
so the two sides have one and the same content.
But the content also has the form in it,
and so it is a twofold content
that behaves as ground and grounded.
One of the two content determinations of
the two somethings is therefore determined,
not merely as being common to them
according to external comparison,
but as their identical substrate
and the foundation of their connection.
As against the other determination of the content,
this determination is essential
and is the ground of the other which is posited,
that is, posited in the something,
the connection of which is the grounded.
In the first something, which is the ground-connection,
this second determination of the content is
also immediately and in itself linked with the first.
But the other something only contains
the one determination in itself as that
in which it is immediately identical with the first something,
but the other as the one which is posited in it.
The former content determination is its
ground by virtue of its being originally linked
in the first something with
the other content determination.

The ground-connection of the content determinations
in the second something is thus mediated
through the connection present in the first something.
The inference is this:
since determination B is implicitly linked
with determination A in a something,
in a second something to which only
the one determination A immediately belongs,
also B is linked with it.
In the second something, not only is
this second determination mediated;
also mediated is that its immediate ground is mediated,
namely by virtue of its original connection
with B in the first something.
This connection is thus the ground of the ground A,
and the whole ground-connection is present in
the second something as posited or grounded.

3. Real ground shows itself to be the self-external reflection of ground;
its complete mediation is the restoration of its identity with itself.
But because this identity has in the process equally acquired
the externality of real ground,
the formal ground-connection in this unity
of itself and real ground is just as much
self-positing as self-sublating ground;
the ground-connection mediates itself with itself through its negation.
The ground is at first, as the original connection,
the connection of immediate content determinations.
The ground-connection, being essential form,
has for sides such that are sublated or are as moments.
Consequently, as the form of immediate determinations,
it connects itself with itself as self-identical
while at the same time connecting with their negation;
accordingly, it is ground not in and for itself
but as connected with the sublated ground-connection.
Second, the sublated connection or the immediate,
which in the original and in the posited connection
is the identical substrate, is likewise real ground
not in and for itself; that it is ground is
rather posited by virtue of that original link.

Thus the ground-connection is in its totality
essentially presupposing reflection;
formal ground presupposes the immediate content determination,
and this content presupposes form as real ground.
Ground is therefore form as an immediate linkage
but in such a manner that it repels itself from itself
and rather presupposes immediacy,
referring itself therein as to another.
This immediate is the content determination, the simple ground;
but as such, that is, as ground, it is equally repelled from itself
and refers itself to itself equally as to an other.
Thus the total ground-connection has taken on
the determination of conditioning mediation.
