
C. DISSOLUTION OF THE THING

This thing, in the manner it has determined itself
as the merely quantitative combination of free matters,
is the absolutely alterable.
Its alteration consists in one or more matters
being dropped from the collection,
or being added to this “also,”
or in the rearrangement of the matters'
respective quantitative ratio.
The coming-to-be and the passing-away of this thing is
the external dissolution of such an external bond,
or the binding of such for which it is indifferent
whether they are bound or not.
The stuffs circulate unchecked in or out of “this” thing,
and the thing itself is absolute porosity
without measure or form of its own.

So the thing, in the absolute determinateness
through which it is a “this,”
is the absolutely dissoluble thing.
This dissolution is an external process of being determined,
just like the being of the thing;
but its dissolution and the externality of its being
is the essential of this being;
the thing is only the “also”;
it consists only of this externality.
But it consists also of its matters,
and not just the abstract “this” as such
but the “this” thing whole is the dissolution of itself.
For the thing is determined as an external collection
of self-subsisting matters;
such matters are not things,
they lack negative self-subsistence;
it is the properties which are rather self-subsistent,
that is to say, are determined with a being
which, as such, is reflected into itself.
Hence the matters are indeed simple, referring only to themselves;
but it is their content which is a determinateness;
the immanent reflection is only the form of this content,
a content which is not, as such, reflected-into-itself
but refers to an other according to its determinateness.
The thing, therefore, is not only their “also,”
is not their reference to each other as indifferent
but is, on the contrary, equally so their negative reference;
and on account of their determinateness
the matters are themselves this negative reflection
which is the puncticity of the thing.
The one matter is not what the other is
according to the determinateness of its content
as contrasted to that of an other;
and the one is not to the extent that the other is,
in accordance with their self-subsistence.

The thing is, therefore, the connecting reference of
the matters of which it consists to each other,
in such a manner that the one matter,
and the other also, subsist in it,
and yet, at the same time,
the one matter does not subsist
in it in so far as the other does.
To the extent, therefore, that
the one matter is in the thing,
the other is thereby sublated;
but the thing is at the same time
the “also,” or the subsistence of the other matter.
In the subsistence of the one matter, therefore,
the other matter does not subsist,
and it also no less subsists in it;
and so with all these diverse matters
in respect to each other.
Since it is thus in the same respect
as the one matter subsists
that the other subsists also,
and this one subsistence of both is
the puncticity or the negative unity of the thing,
the two interpenetrate absolutely;
and since the thing is at the same time
only the “also” of the matters,
and these are reflected into their determinateness,
they are indifferent to one another,
and in interpenetrating they do not touch.
The matters are, therefore, essentially porous,
so that the one subsists in the pores
or in the non-subsistence of the others;
but these others are themselves porous;
in their pores or their non-subsistence
the first and also all the rest subsist;
their subsistence is at the same time
their sublatedness and the subsistence of others;
and this subsistence of the others is
just as much their sublatedness
and the subsisting of the first
and equally so of all others.
The thing is, therefore,
the self-contradictory mediation of
independent self-subsistence through its opposite,
that is to say, through its negation,
or of one self-subsisting matter
through the subsisting and non-subsisting of an other.

In “this” thing, concrete existence has attained its completion,
namely, that it is at once being that exists in itself,
or independent subsistence, and unessential concrete existence.
The truth of concrete existence is thus this:
that it has its in-itself in unessentiality,
or that it subsists in an other,
indeed in the absolute other,
or that it has its own nothingness for substrate.
It is, therefore, appearance.
