
SECTION II

Appearance

Essence must appear.

Being is the absolute abstraction;
this negativity is not something external to it,
but being is rather being,
and nothing but being,
only as this absolute negativity.
Because of this negativity,
being is only as self-sublating being
and is essence.
But, conversely,
essence as simple self-equality
is likewise being.
The doctrine of being contains
the first proposition, “being is essence.”
The second proposition, “essence is being,”
constitutes the content of the first section
of the doctrine of essence.
But this being into which
essence makes itself
is essential being,
concrete existence,
a being which has come forth
out of negativity and inwardness.

Thus essence appears.
Reflection is the internal shining of essence.
The determinations of this reflection are included
in the unity purely and simply as posited, sublated;
or reflection is essence immediately
identical with itself in its positedness.
But since this essence is ground,
through its self-sublating reflection,
or the reflection that which returns into itself,
essence determines itself as something real;
further, since this real determination,
or the otherness,
of the ground-connection sublates itself
in the reflection of the ground
and becomes concrete existence,
the form determinations acquire therein
an element of independent subsistence.
Their reflective shine comes to completion in appearance.

The essentiality that has advanced to immediacy is,

first, concrete existence,
and a concrete existent or thing,
an undifferentiated unity of
essence and its immediacy.
The thing indeed contains reflection,
but its negativity is at first
dissolved in its immediacy;
but, because its ground is
essentially reflection,
its immediacy is sublated
and the thing makes itself
into a positedness.

Second, then, it is appearance.
Appearance is what the thing is in itself,
or the truth of it.
But this concrete existence,
only posited and reflected into otherness,
is equally the surpassing of itself into its infinity;
opposed to the world of appearance
there stands the world that exists
in itself reflected into itself.
But the being that appears and essential being
stand referred to each other absolutely.

Thus concrete existence is, third, essential relation;
what appears shows the essential,
and the essential is in its appearance.
Relation is the still incomplete union of
reflection into otherness and reflection into itself;
the complete interpenetrating of the two is actuality.
