
SECTION III

Measure

Abstractly expressed, quality and quantity are in measure united.
Being as such is the immediate equality of determinateness with itself.
This immediacy of determinateness has sublated itself.
Quantity is being that has returned to itself in such a way
that it is a simple self-equality indifferent to determinateness.
But this indifference is only the externality of having
the determinateness not in itself but in an other.
As third, we now have the externality that refers itself to itself;
as self-reference, it is at the same time sublated externality and
carries the difference from itself in it;
a difference which, as externality, is the quantitative moment,
and, as taken back into itself, the qualitative.

Since among the categories of transcendental idealism
modality comes after quantity and quality,
with relation inserted in between,
this is an appropriate place to say something about it.
In transcendental idealism, this category has the meaning that
it is the connection of the subject matter to thought.
As understood by that idealism, thought is as such
essentially external to the thing-in-itself.
Hence, inasmuch as the other categories have
the transcendental determination of
belonging only to consciousness,
but as its objective moment,
so modality, which is the category of
the connection to the subject,
possesses the determination of
reflection in itself in a relative sense,
that is to say, the objectivity
which is granted to the other categories
is lacking in those of modality;
these, according to Kant's words,
do not add in the least to the concept
as a determination of the object
but only express its relation to the faculty of cognition
(Cr. of Pure R., 2nd edn, pp. 99, 266).
The categories which Kant groups under modality
(possibility, actuality, and necessity)
will come up later in their proper place.
Kant did not apply the form of triplicity
(an infinitely important form even though with him
it occurred only as a formal spark of light)
to the genera of his categories (to quantity, quality, etc.),
but only to their species to which
he also gave the name of genera.
He was therefore unable to hit upon
the third to quality and quantity.

With Spinoza, the mode is likewise
the third after substance and attribute;
Spinoza defines it as the affections of substance,
or as that which is in another through which it is also comprehended.
In this way of conceiving it, this third is externality as such;
as has already been mentioned, with Spinoza generally,
the rigidity of substance lacks the turning back into itself.

The remark just made extends to any of the systems of pantheism
which thought has in one way or other produced.
Being, the one, substance, the infinite, essence, is the first;
opposite this abstraction is the second which
can be mustered in an equally abstract form,
as is habitually done as the next step in any purely formalistic thinking,
namely all determinateness generally taken as the mere finite,
the mere accidental, the transitory, the extraneous and unessential, etc.
But the bond connecting this second with the first is too invasive
for the second not to be not equally grasped with the first;
thus with Spinoza the attribute is the whole of substance,
though as comprehended by the understanding,
which is itself a restriction of substance or mode;
and so the mode, the insubstantial as such which can
be grasped only through an other,
constitutes the opposite extreme of substance, the third.
Also Indian pantheism, taken abstractly, has attained
in its monstrous fantasies this refinement
which runs like a moderating thread across its excesses
as its one point of interest namely
that Brahma, the one of abstract thought,
progresses through the shape of Vishnu,
particularly in the form of Krishna, to the third, Shiva.
The determination of this third is that of mode, alteration,
coming-to-be and passing-away;
it is the field of externality in general.
This Indian trinity has tempted a comparison with the Christian,
and one must indeed acknowledge a common element in them.
But it is essential to be aware of the difference that separates them.
It is not just that this difference is infinite
but that the true infinity makes the difference.
The determination of the Indian third principle is that
it is the dispersal of the substantial unity into its opposite,
not its turning back to itself,
a spiritual void rather, not spirit.
In the true trinity, there is not only unity but unification;
the syllogism is brought to a unity which is full of content and actual,
a unity which in its totally concrete determination is spirit.
The principle of the mode and of alteration
does not, of course, exclude unity altogether.
In Spinozism, for instance, precisely the mode is as such untrue
while substance alone is what truly is;
everything is supposed to be reduced to substance,
and this is then a sinking of all content into
an only formal unity void of content.
As for Shiva, it too is again the great whole,
not distinct from Brahma, from Brahma itself, that is,
the distinction and the determinateness just disappear
without being preserved, without being sublated,
and the unity does not become concrete unity,
nor is the diremption reconciled.
The supreme goal of the human being,
relegated as he is to the sphere
of coming-to-be and passing-away,
of modality in general,
is to sink into unconsciousness,
into unity with Brahma, annihilation;
the Buddhist Nirvana, Nibbana, etc., is the same.

Now although the mode is as such abstract externality,
indifference to qualitative as well as quantitative determinations,
and nothing in the essence should depend on the external,
the unessential, it is nevertheless conceded that
in the many all depends on the how;
but this is to concede that the mode itself
essentially belongs to the substance of a thing,
a very indefinite connection but
one which at least implies that the externality of
the mode is not all that abstract an externality after all.
Here the mode has the definite meaning of being measure.
The Spinozistic mode, just like the Indian principle of alteration,
is the measureless.
The Greeks were aware that everything has a measure.
Parmenides himself introduces necessity after abstract being,
as the ancient limit which is imposed on all.
And this awareness, although still vague, is
the beginning of a much higher concept
than is contained in substance
and in the distinction of the mode from it.

Measure in its more developed, more reflected form is necessity.
Fate, Nemesis, ultimately comes down to a determination of measure.
Whatever renders itself beyond the pale, becomes too great, too high,
is brought down to the other extreme of being reduced to nothing,
so that the mean of measure, the medium, is restored.
That the Absolute, God, is the measure of all things, is not
a stronger statement of pantheism than the definition,
“the Absolute, God, is being,” but is infinitely truer.
Measure is indeed an external way of things, a more or less,
but one which is as at the same time reflected into itself,
not merely an indifferent and external determinateness
but one which exists in itself;
thus it is the concrete truth of being.
For this reason the nations have revered in it
the presence of something inviolable and sacred.

Already present in measure is the idea of essence,
namely of being self-identical in
the immediacy of being determined,
so that this immediacy is reduced
through the self-identity to something mediated,
just as the self-identity is equally mediated
only through this externality,
but the mediation is one with itself:
this is reflection, the moments of which indeed are,
but in this being are absolutely nothing but
moments of their negative unity.
In measure, the qualitative element is quantitative;
the determinateness or the difference is indifferent
and therefore a difference which is none;
it is sublated and this quantitativeness,
as an immanent turning back in which it is qualitative,
constitutes the being-in-and-for-itself which is essence.
But measure is essence only implicitly in itself or in its concept;
this concept of measure is not yet posited.
Measure is as such still the existent unity of the
qualitative and the quantitative element;
its moments are an existence, a quality and some quanta of this quality
which, in themselves, are indeed only indivisible,
but do not yet have the meaning of this reflected determination.
In the development of measure, these moments are differentiated
but at the same time referred to each other,
so that the identity which they are in themselves becomes
their connection explicitly, that is, is posited.
The meaning of this development is the realization of measure
in which the latter posits itself in relation to itself
and consequently as moment as well;
through this mediation, measure is determined as sublated;
its immediacy as well as that of its moments disappears;
these moments are reflected and thus measure,
having disclosed what it is according to its concept,
has passed over into essence.

Measure is at first the immediate unity of
the qualitative and the quantitative element, so that it is,

first, a quantum that has qualitative meaning and is as measure.
As so implicitly determined in itself, its further determination is that
the difference of its moments,
of its qualitatively and quantitatively determined being,
is disclosed in it.
These moments further determine themselves into
wholes of measure which as such are self-subsistent,
and, inasmuch as they refer to each other essentially,
measure becomes,

second, a ratio of specific quanta, each an independent measure.
But their self-subsistence also rests essentially
on a quantitative relation and a difference of magnitude,
and so the self-subsistence becomes a transition
of one measure into another.
The result is that measure collapses into the measureless.
But this beyond of measure is the negativity of measure
only in itself; thus,

third, the indifference of the determinations of
measure is thereby posited, and measure
(real measure because of the negativity contained within it)
is posited as an inverse ratio of measures
which, as self-subsistent qualities,
essentially rest on only their quantity
and their negative reference to each other,
and consequently prove to be only moments of
their truly self-subsistent unity.
This unity is the reflection-into-itself of each
and the positing of them; it is essence.

The development of measure,
which we have attempted in what follows,
is among the most difficult of subject matters.
Starting with immediate, external measure,
it would have to proceed, on the one hand,
to the further abstract determination of
the quantitative aspect of natural things
(of a mathematics of nature);
on the other side, it would have to indicate the link
between this determination of measure
and the qualitative aspect of those things,
at least in general, for the detailed demonstration of the
link between the qualitative and the quantitative aspects
as they originate in the concept of a concrete object
belongs to the particular science of the concrete
(examples of which, concerning the law of falling bodies
and the free movement of the heavens,
will be found in the Encyclopedia of the Philosophical Sciences).
We may remark quite in general in this connection
that the different forms in which measure is realized
also belong to different spheres of natural reality.
The complete, abstract indifference of developed measure,
that is, of its laws, can only be found in the sphere of mechanism
where concrete corporeity is only abstract matter itself;
the qualitative differences of this matter are
of an essentially quantitative nature;
space and time are nothing but pure externalities,
and the aggregates of matters, the masses, the intensity of weight,
are determinations which are just as external
and have their proper determinateness in the quantitative element.
On the other hand, in physical things but even more so in the organic,
this quantitative determinateness of abstract materiality is
already disturbed by the multiplicity
and consequently the conflict of qualities.
And the thus ensuing conflict is not just one of qualities as such,
but measure itself is subordinated here to higher relations
and its immanent development is reduced rather to
the simple form of immediate measure.
The limbs of the animal organism have a measure
which, as a simple quantum, stands
in a ratio to the other quanta of the other limbs;
the proportions of the human body are the fixed ratios of such quanta,
and the science of nature still has far to go in
discovering anything about the link that connects
these magnitudes with the organic functions
on which they are entirely dependent.
But the closest example of the reduction of an immanent
measure to a merely externally determined magnitude is motion.
In the heavenly bodies, motion is free motion,
one which is only determined by the concept from which alone,
consequently, its magnitudes equally depend (see above);
but in the organic body this free motion is reduced
to one which is arbitrary or mechanically regular,
that is, to one which is totally abstract and formal.

And in the realm of spirit there is even less of
a characteristic, free development of measure to be found.
For instance, it is obvious that a
republican constitution like the Athenian,
or an aristocratic constitution mixed with democracy,
is possible only in a state of a certain size;
it is also obvious that in civil society
the multitudes of individuals who belong to
the different occupations stand in a certain ratio to each other.
But none of this yields either laws of measures or typical forms of it.
In the spiritual realm as such there are indeed
distinctions of intensity of character,
strength of imagination, sensations, representations, and so on;
but in determining them one cannot go past this indefinite duo of
“strength” and “weakness.”
To see how lame and totally empty ultimately turn out to be
the so-called laws which have been established for
the relation of strength and weakness in sensations,
representations, and so on, one need only look at
the psychologies that busy themselves with just such matters.
