C. THE MEASURELESS

The exclusive measure, even in its realized being-for-itself,
remains affected by the moment of quantitative existence
and is therefore susceptible to the movement up and down
the quantum scale of varying ratios.
Something, or a quality, based on such a ratio
is driven beyond itself into the measureless,
collapsing under the mere mutation of its magnitude.
Magnitude is that constitutional aspect
where an existence can be caught up
in an apparently harmless entanglement
and be destroyed by it.

The abstract measureless is the quantum in general
inasmuch as it lacks internal order
and is only indifferent determinateness
which does not alter measure.
In the nodal lines of measures this determinateness is
at the same time  posited as specifying;
the abstract measureless sublates itself
into qualitative determinateness;
the new measure-relation into which
the original passes over is measureless
with respect to the latter
but, in it, it equally is a quality that exists for itself;
what is thus posited is the alternation of specific existences
with one another and equally of them with relations
that still remain merely quantitative,
an alternation ad infinitum.
Therefore, present in this transition is
both the negation of the specific relations
and the negation of the quantitative progression;
this is the infinite existing for itself.
In the sphere of existence, the qualitative infinite
was the irruption of the infinite into the finite,
the immediate transition and vanishing of
the “this here” into its “beyond there.”
In contrast to it, the quantitative infinite is
in its very determinateness the continuity of quantum,
its continuing beyond itself.
The qualitatively finite becomes infinite;
the quantitatively finite is its beyond in it:
it points beyond itself.
But this infinite of the specification of measure posits
both the qualitative and the quantitative as
each sublating itself into the other,
and it thereby posits their first immediate unity,
which is measure in general, as returned into itself
and consequently as itself posited.
The transition of the qualitative,
of one specific concrete existence into another,
is such that what happens is only
an alteration of magnitude determinateness;
the alteration of the qualitative
as such into the qualitative is thus posited as
an external and indifferent alteration,
as a coming together with itself;
the quantitative, for its part,
sublates itself by suddenly turning into the qualitative,
that is, a being which is determined in-and-for-itself.
This unity which thus continues in itself
in its alternating measures is
the self-subsistent matter that truly persists,
the fact.

What we have here is

(a) one and the same substantial matter
which is posited as the perennial substrate
of its differentiations.
This detaching of being from its determinateness
already begins in quantum in general;
something is great indifferently as
against the determinateness it has.
In measure, the persisting matter is
itself already in itself the unity of
the qualitative and the quantitative,
the two moments into which the general
sphere of being is distinguished,
each as the beyond of the other;
in this way the perennial substrate
begins to possess in it the determination
of an existent infinity.

(b) This self-sameness of the substrate is posited
in that the qualitative independent measures
into which the determining unit is dispersed
consist of only quantitative differences,
so that the substrate persists
while being internally distinguished.

(c) In the infinite progression of the nodal series
there is posited the continuation of the qualitative
into the quantitative advance as into an indifferent alteration,
but equally too, there is posited the negation
of the qualitative contained in the progression and consequently,
at the same time, of the merely quantitative externality.
The quantitative pointing beyond itself to an other
which is itself quantitative perishes
with the emergence of a measure-relation,
of a quality, and the qualitative transition is sublated
in the very fact that the new quality is
itself only a quantitative relation.
This reciprocal transition into the other
of the qualitative and the quantitative moments
occurs on the basis of their unity,
and the meaning of this process is only
the existence which is the demonstration or the positing
that such a substrate does underlie the process
and is the unity of its moments.

In the series of indepedent measure relations
the one-sided members of the series are
immediate qualitative somethings
(specific gravities or chemical materials,
bases or alkalis, acids, for instance),
and their neutralizations
(by which we must understand here also the combinations
of materials of different specific gravities)
are in turn self-subsistent
and themselves exclusive measure-relations,
mutually indifferent totalities existing for themselves.
Such relations are now determined
only as nodes of one and the same substrate.
The measures and the self-subsistent forms posited
with them are consequently demoted to states.
Alteration is only the mutation of a state,
and that which passes over is posited
as remaining the same in the mutation.

In reviewing the progressive determination
which measure has gone through,
the moments of the progression can be summed up as follows.
Measure is at first itself
the immediate unity of quality and quantity
in the form of a common quantum
which is, however, specific.
As a determinateness of quantity
which does not refer to an other but refers to itself,
measure is thus essentially a ratio.
Consequently, it also holds its moments
as sublated and unseparated in itself;
as is always the case in a concept,
the difference in the ratio is such
that each of its moments is itself the unity of
the qualitative and the quantitative moment.
The difference is thus real,
and it yields a multitude of measure-relations
which, as formal totalities,
are each self-subsistent in themselves.
The series which form the two sides of these ratios
are for each single member the same constant ordering
by which the member, as belonging to the one side,
relates itself to the whole series standing opposite it.
This ordering, although a mere order,
a still wholly external unity,
demonstrates itself to be,
as the immanently specifying unity of a measure
which has a determinate being-for-itself,
distinguished from its specifications;
but this specifying principle is not yet the free concept,
which alone gives its differences an immanent determination;
the principle is at first, rather, only a substrate,
a matter, for whose differences, in order that they be totalities,
that is, that they should have in themselves the nature
of their stable, self-equal substrate,
there is only available the external quantitative determination
which shows itself at the same time to be a qualitative differentiation.
In this self-unity of the substrate
the determination of measure is a sublated determination,
its quality an external state determined by quantum.
This course is equally the progressive determination
of measure and its demotion to a moment.
