A. THE RELATION OF INDEPENDENT MEASURES

By measures we no longer mean now
merely immediate measures,
but measures that are self-subsistent
because they become within themselves
relations which are specified,
and in this being-for-itself
they are thus a something,
things that are physical
and at first material.

(a) However, the whole,
which is a relation of such measures
is at first itself immediate.
Thus the two sides,
which are as such independent measures,
have their subsistence in
things external to each other,
and are posited in combination externally.

(b) But the self-subsistent materialities are
what they qualitatively are only in virtue of
the quantitative determination that they have as measures,
and are posited in virtue of this same quantitative connection
with others as non-indifferent from them (the so-called affinity);
they are the members of a series of such quantitative relations.

(c) This indifferent multifarious relating
concludes at the same time by cutting itself off
as an exclusive being-for-itself:
the so-called elective affinity.

a. Combination of two measures

As a measure relation, something is in itself determined by
quanta to which further qualities accrue;
the something is the connection of such qualities.
One of them is the something's in-itselfness,
according to which it is something
that exists for itself, something material
(a weight, if taken intensively;
or, taken extensively, an aggregate of parts);
the other is however the externality of this itselfness
(something abstract and idealized, space).
These qualities are quantitatively determined,
and their mutual relation is what constitutes
the qualitative nature of the material something
the ratio of weight to volume, the specifically determined gravity.
The volume, the idealized element, is the one to be taken as unit,
whereas the intensive aspect,
which in quantitative determinateness
and in comparison with the other appears as extensive magnitude,
that is, an aggregate of ones existing for themselves, is the amount.
The purely qualitative relating of the two determinacies
of magnitude in a ratio of powers has disappeared,
because with the self-subsistence of the being-for-itself
(the material being) immediacy has come back,
and in this immediacy the determinateness
of magnitude is a quantum whose relation to the other side is likewise
determined in the ordinary exponent of a direct ratio.

This exponent is the specific quantum of the something,
but it is an immediate quantum and this is determined
(as is also the specific nature of the something)
only in being compared with other exponents of like ratios.
The exponent constitutes the specific way
in which the something is determined in itself,
the inner measure characteristic of it;
but since this, the something's measure, rests on a quantum,
it is also an external and indifferent determinateness,
and the something, despite its inner determination as measure,
is for this reason subject to alteration.
The other to which it can relate as alterable
is not an aggregate of matters,
not a quantum in general;
on the contrary, against these it holds out
its specific intrinsic determination of being;
rather, it is a quantum which is at the same time
it too the exponent of such a specific ratio.
Take two things of different inner measure that
stand connected and enter into composition,
say, two metals of different specific gravity.
(In what way the two must otherwise be homogeneous
in nature in order for the composition to be possible,
e.g. that we cannot be speaking here of
a metal combining with water, this is not at issue here).
Now, on the one hand each of the two measures preserves itself
in the alteration they will incur because of
the externality of quantum, for each is a measure;
but, on the other hand, this self-preservation is itself
a negative relating to the quantum, a specification of it,
and, since this quantum is the exponent of the ratio of measure,
the self-preservation is an alteration of
the measure itself and indeed a reciprocal specification.

According to its merely quantitative determination,
the compound would be the mere sum
of the two magnitudes of the one quality
and the two magnitudes of the other quality,
e.g. the sum of the two weights
and the two volumes in a compound of two matters
of different specific weights, so that not only
would the weight of the mixture remain equal to the said sum
but also the space which the mixture occupies
would remain equal to the sum of the two spaces.
But only the weight of the mixture is found
to be in fact the sum of the weights present prior to combination;
the side capable of addition is the one which,
as the one existing for itself,
has attained stability of being
and consequently a permanent immediate quantum;
the weight of matter, or, what amounts to the same thing from
a quantitative standpoint, the aggregate of material parts.
Alteration falls instead in the exponents,
for they are the expression of the qualitative side of the compound,
of its being-for-itself as relations of measure,
and, since the quantum as such is subject
to accidental alteration by an increase which is summed,
this being-for-itself proves at the same time to be
a negating factor with respect to this externality.
Since this immanent determining of the quantitative element
cannot appear, as we have seen, in the weight,
it turns up in the other quality
which is the idealized side of the relation.
It might be surprising to sense-perception
that, upon the mixing of two specifically diverse materials,
what results is an alteration of the total volume,
normally a diminution of it,
for it is space which gives stability to matters
otherwise existing outside one another.
But this stability, in face of the negativity
which is in the being-for-itself,
is that which has no existence in itself,
is the alterable as such.
In this manner, space is posited as what it is in truth,
an idealization.

But then, not only is one of the qualitative sides
posited as alterable but measure itself,
and so also the qualitative determinateness
of the something which is based on it,
has shown itself not to be something stable within
but, like quantum in general, to have
its determinateness in other measure-relations.

b. Measure as a series of measure-relations

1. If something united with an other were what it is
only by virtue of simple qualitative determination,
and the same also applied to the other,
then the two would only sublate themselves in being compounded.
But when something is in itself a measure-relation,
it is independent yet at the same time capable of
union with another which is also in itself a measure-relation.
For in being sublated in union, each preserves itself
through the permanence of its quantitative indifference
and it behaves as the specifying moment of a new measure-relation.
Its quality is enveloped in the quantitative element;
it is therefore equally indifferent towards
the exponent of the new measure
is itself only some quantum or other,
an external determinateness,
and its indifference is displayed by the fact
that the specifically determined something runs,
with other such measures,
into precisely the same kind of neutralizations
of reciprocal measure-relations;
the specific property of the something is
not expressed in the one measure-relation alone
which is formed by it and another something.

2. This combination with a plurality of others
which are in themselves likewise measures yields different ratios
that therefore have different exponents.
The measure which is independent has the exponent of its
being-determined-in-itself only in the comparison with other measures;
neutrality with the others constitutes,
however, its real comparison with them;
it is its comparison with them through itself.
The exponents of these ratios are however diverse,
and the independent measure consequently displays
its qualitative exponent as the series of
these different amounts of which it is the unit;
a series of specific ways of relating to others.
As one immediate quantum, the qualitative exponent
expresses one single relation.
The independent measure truly differentiates itself
in the characteristic series of exponents
which it, taken as a unit, forms with
other equally independent measures;
for each of these measures, also brought in connection with
any other and taken as a unit, forms another series.
The relation of such series among themselves now constitutes
the qualitative aspect of the independent measure.

Now inasmuch as this independent measure produces
a series of exponents with a series of such independent measures,
it appears at first, when compared with another
independent measure outside this series itself,
that it is differentiated from it by virtue of
the fact that this other independent measure produces
another series of exponents with the same measures opposite to it.
But in this way these two independent measures
would not be comparable,
not in so far as each is regarded as a unit
with respect to its exponents,
and the two series thus resulting on the basis
of this connection of unit and exponents
do not differ in any determinate way.
The two measures which, as independent,
are supposed to be compared,
are at first differentiated from each other only as quanta;
in order that their ratio be determined,
the ratio requires a unit which exists for itself
and is common to both.
This determinate unit is to be sought, as shown,
only where the specific existence of
the two independent measures to be compared
is to be found, namely in the ratio
which the exponents of the ratio of
the series have to each other.
But this ratio of the exponents is
itself a unit existing for itself
and in fact determinate only in so far as the members of
the series have it as a constant ratio between them;
in that way it can be their common unit.
In it alone, therefore, lies the possibility of comparing
the two independent measures which were assumed not
to neutralize each other but to be rather reciprocally indifferent.
Each, taken by itself outside the comparison,
is the unit of the ratios that it establishes
with the opposite members:
these are the amounts relative to this unit
and hence represent the series of exponents.
But conversely, this series is the unit
for the two independent measures which
when compared with each other are as quanta to each other;
as such they are themselves different amounts
of their just indicated unit.

But further, the measures which together with the two
or rather indefinitely many reciprocally opposing
and contrasting measures
yield the series of the exponents of
the ratio of these same measures,
are equally independent in themselves;
each is a specific something with its own relevant measure-relation.
To this extent, they are similarly to be taken each as a
unit so that they have a series of exponents in
the two or rather the indeterminate plurality of measures,
which are first named and compared only among themselves,
and these exponents are the comparative numbers of
precisely these named measures;
conversely, the comparative numbers of the independent measures
now taken singly are similarly the series of the
exponents for the members of the first series.
In this way, both sides are a series in which,
first, each number is simply a unit with respect to the
opposite series in which it has its specifically
determined being as a series of exponents;
second, each number is itself one of the exponents
for each member of the opposite series;
and, third, it is a comparative number for
the rest of the numbers of its series
and, as such an amount which belongs
to it also as an exponent,
it has its unit, determined for itself,
in the opposite series.

3. In this relation there is a return to the mode
in which quantum was posited as existing for itself,
namely as degree, as being simple
and yet having the magnitude of its determinateness
in a quantum that exists outside it,
one which is a circle of quanta.
In measure, however, this externality is not
merely a quantum and a circle of quanta,
but a series of numerical ratios,
and it is in the entirety of these that
the being-determined-for-itself of measure lies.
Just as it is the case in the being-for-itself of quantum as degree,
the nature of the independent measure has turned into this self-externality.
Its self-reference is at first an immediate relation,
and by that very fact its indifference to an other
lies only in the quantum.
Hence its qualitative side falls in this externality,
and its relating to the other becomes
that which constitutes the specific determination
of this independent measure.
Such a determination thus consists solely
in the quantitative mode of this relating,
and this mode is determined just as much by the other
as by the measure itself,
and this other is a series of quanta
while the measure, for its part,
is one such quantum.
But this connection in which two specific measures
specify themselves in a third thing (the exponent) further entails that,
in the exponent, the one measure has not gone over into the other;
that there is not, therefore, only one negation,
but that in the connection the two measures are
rather each negatively posited,
and since each preserves itself in it indifferently,
their negation is itself also negated.
This, their qualitative unity, is thus
an exclusive unit existing for itself.
It is only in this moment of exclusion
that the exponents, at first comparative numbers,
first gain in them the determinateness
truly specifying them reciprocally
and their difference thus becomes of qualitative nature.
But such a difference has a quantitative basis:
first, the independent measure relates to a plurality
of its qualitatively other side only because
in this relating it is at the same time indifferent;
second, this neutral connection is in virtue of
its quantitative basis not only alteration
but is now posited as a negation of the negation
and as exclusive unit.
Consequently, the affinity of an independent measure
with the plurality of measures of the other side is
no longer an indifferent connection but an elective affinity.

c. Elective affinity

The expression elective affinity used here
refers to a chemical relation,
as also do the preceding neutrality and affinity.
For in the chemical sphere a matter
receives its specific determinateness
essentially in the connection with its other;
it exists concretely only as this non-indifference.
Moreover, this specific connection is bound up with quantity
and is at the same time not only a connection with a single other,
but with a series of such non-indifferent matters
standing over and against it;
combinations with this series rest on a so-called affinity
with every member of the series,
even though in this indifference each member excludes every other.
We now have to consider this connection of opposite determinations.
But it is not just in the chemical sphere that specificity is
exhibited in a circle of combinations;
the meaning of a single note also depends on its relation to,
and combination with, another note and a series of other notes;
the harmony or disharmony in such a circle of combinations
constitutes its qualitative nature
which is at the same time based on quantitative ratios
that form a series of exponents,
and the ratios of the two specific ratios is
what each of the combined notes is within it.
The single note is the keynote of a system,
but at the same time also one member in
the system of every other note.
The harmonies are exclusive elective affinities
whose characteristic quality, however,
equally dissolves again in the externality of
a mere quantitative progression.
Where to find, however, the principle of a measure
for such affinities which among others and against others
(whether chemical or musical or whatever)
are elective affinities,
more will be said in the following Remark
in connection with chemical affinity;
but this is a question of a higher order
which is very closely bound up with
the specific nature of what is strictly qualitative
and belongs to particular parts of the concrete science of nature.

Inasmuch as the member of a series has its qualitative unity
in the way it relates to the whole of an opposite series,
the members of which differ from each other only by virtue of
the quantum required for being neutralized with that member,
the more specific determinateness in this manifold affinity
is likewise only quantitative.
In elective affinity which is an exclusive, qualitative connection,
the relating escapes this quantitative difference.
The next determination which offers itself is this:
that in accordance with the difference in the number,
hence the extensive magnitudes,
of the members of one side required
for the neutralization of a member in another side,
the elective affinity of this member would be directed
to the members of the first series with all of which it has affinity.
Thus transformed, the exclusion that would thereby be established
in the form of a firmer bonding against other possibilities of combination
would appear in a proportionally greater intensity,
in keeping with the previously demonstrated identity
of the forms of extensive and intensive magnitude,
inasmuch as the determinateness of magnitude is in both one and the same.
However, this sudden conversion of the one-sided form
of extensive magnitude also into its other,
the intensive form, changes nothing in so far as
the nature of the fundamental determination is concerned,
which is one and the same quantum.
In fact, therefore, no exclusiveness would thereby be posited,
but instead of one single bonding
a combination of any number of members
could just as well take place,
provided that the portions of such members
entering into the combination corresponded to
the required quantum proportionately
to the ratios between them.

But the combination which we have also called neutralization
is not only the form of intensity;
the exponent is essentially a determination of measure
and, as such, exclusive.
On this side of exclusive relating,
numbers have lost their continuity
and their tendency to combine;
their relating is one of more or less,
and this acquires a negative character;
and the advantage that one exponent has over another
does not remain confined to the determinateness of magnitude.
Also equally present is the other side
which makes it again a matter of indifference
to a moment of measure whether it receives its
neutralizing quantum from several opposite moments,
from each according to the determinateness
that specifies it as against an other;
the exclusive, negative relating is at the same time
vulnerable to this incursion of the quantitative side.
What is posited here is thus the sudden conversion of an indifferent,
merely quantitative relating into a qualitative one,
and conversely the transition of a specifically determinate being
into merely external relation,
a series of relations, sometimes of a merely quantitative nature,
sometimes specific relations and measures.

