
B. THE WORLD OF APPEARANCE AND THE WORLD-IN-ITSELF

1. The concrete existing world tranquilly
raises itself to a kingdom of laws;
the null content of its manifold determinate being
has its subsistence in an other;
its subsistence is therefore its dissolution.
In this other, however, that which appears also comes to itself;
thus appearance is in its changing also an enduring,
and its positedness is law.
Law is this simple identity of appearance with itself;
it is, therefore, its substrate and not its ground,
for it is not the negative unity of appearance
but, as its simple identity, is its immediate unity,
the abstract unity, alongside which, therefore,
its other content also occurs.
The content is this content; it holds together internally,
or has its negative reflection inside itself.
It is reflected into an other;
this other is itself a concrete existence of appearance;
the appearing things have their grounds and conditions
in other appearing things.

In fact, however, law is also
the other of appearance as appearance,
and its negative reflection as in its other.
The content of appearance,
which differs from the content of law,
is the concrete existent
which has negativity for its ground
or is reflected into its non-being.
But this other, which is also a concrete existent,
is such an existent as likewise reflected into its non-being;
it is thus the same and that which appears in it
is in fact reflected not into an other but into itself;
it is this very reflection of positedness into itself
which is law.
But as something that appears
it is essentially reflected into its non-being,
or its identity is itself essentially
just as much its negativity and its other.
The immanent reflection of appearance,
law, is therefore not only
the identical substrate of appearance
but the latter has in law its opposite,
and law is its negative unity.

Now through this, the determination of law
has been altered within the law itself.
At first, law is only a diversified content
and the formal reflection of positedness into itself,
so that the positedness of one of its sides is
the positedness of the other side.
But because it is also the negative reflection into itself,
its sides behave not only as different
but as negatively referring to each other.
Or, if the law is considered just for itself,
the sides of its content are indifferent to each other;
but they are no less sublated through their identity;
the positedness of the one is the positedness of the other;
consequently, the subsistence of each is
also the non-subsistence of itself.
This positedness of the one side in the other
is their negative unity,
and each positedness is not only the positedness
of that side but also of the other,
or each side is itself this negative unity.
The positive identity which they have in the law as such is
at first only their inner unity
which stands in need of proof and mediation,
since this negative unity is not yet posited in them.
But since the different sides of law are now determined
as being different in their negative unity,
or as being such that each contains the other within
while at the same time repelling this otherness from itself,
the identity of law is now also one which is posited and real.

Consequently, law has likewise obtained
the missing moment of the negative form of its sides,
the moment that previously still belonged to appearance;
concrete existence has thereby returned into itself fully
and has reflected itself into its absolute otherness
which has determinate being-in-and-for-itself.
That which was previously law, therefore,
is no longer only one side of the whole.
It is the essential totality of appearance,
so that it now obtains also the moment of
unessentiality that belonged to the latter
but as reflected unessentiality
that has determinate being in itself,
that is, as essential negativity.
As immediate content, law is determined in general,
distinguished from other laws,
of which there is an indeterminate multitude.
But because now it explicitly is essential negativity,
it no longer contains that merely
indifferent, accidental content determination;
its content is rather every determinateness in general,
essentially connected together in a totalizing connection.
Thus appearance reflected-into-itself is
now a world that discloses itself above
the world of appearance as one
which is in and for itself.

The kingdom of laws contains only
the simple, unchanging but diversified content
of the concretely existing world.
But because it is now the total reflection of this world,
it also contains the moment of its essenceless manifoldness.
This moment of alterability and alteration,
reflected into itself and essential,
is the absolute negativity
or the form in general as such:
its moments, however, have  the reality of
self-subsisting but reflected concrete existence
in the world  that has determinate being in-and-for-itself,
just as, conversely, this reflected
self-subsistence has form in it,
and its content is therefore not a mere manifold
but a content holding itself together essentially.

This world which is in and for itself is
also called the suprasensible world,
inasmuch as the concretely existing world
is characterized as sensible,
that is, as one intended for intuition,
which is the immediate attitude of consciousness.
The suprasensible world likewise has
immediate, concrete existence,
but reflected, essential concrete existence.
Essence has no immediate existence yet;
but it is, and in a more profound sense than being;
the thing is the beginning of the reflected concrete existence;
it is an immediacy which is not yet posited,
not yet essential or reflected;
but it is in truth not an immediate which is simply there.
Things are posited only as the
things of another, suprasensible, world
first as true concrete existences,
and, second, as the truth in contrast to that which just is.
What is recognized in them is that there is
a being distinguished from immediate being,
and this being is true concrete existence.
On the one side, the sense-representation
that ascribes concrete existence
only to the immediate being of
feeling and intuition is in this determination overcome;
but, on the other side, also overcome is
the unconscious reflection which,
although it possesses the representation of things,
forces, the inner, and so on, does not know
that such determinations are not sensible
or immediately existing beings,
but reflected concrete existences.

2. The world which is in and for itself is
the totality of concrete existence;
outside it there is nothing.
But, within it, it is absolute negativity or form,
and therefore its immanent reflection is
negative self-reference.
It contains opposition,
and splits internally
as the world of the senses
and as the world of otherness
or the world of appearance.
For this reason, since it is totality,
it is also only one side of the totality
and constitutes in this determination
a self-subsistence different from the world of appearance.
The world of appearance has its negative unity
in the essential world to which it founders
and into which it returns as to its ground.
Further, the essential world is also
the positing ground of the world of appearances;
for, since it contains the absolute form essentially,
it sublates its self-identity,
makes itself into positedness
and, as this posited immediacy,
it is the world of appearance.

Further, it is not only ground in general
of the world of appearance but its determinate ground.
Already as the kingdom of laws it is a manifold of content,
indeed the essential content of the world of appearance,
and, as ground with content, it is
the determinate ground of that other world.
But it is such only according to that content,
for the world of appearance still had other
and manifold content than the kingdom of laws,
because the negative moment was still the one peculiarly its own.
But because the kingdom of laws now has this moment likewise in it,
it is the totality of the content of the world of appearance
and the ground of all its manifoldness.
But it is at the same time the negative of
this manifoldness and thus a world opposed to it.
That is to say, in the identity of the two worlds,
because the one world is determined
according to form as the essential
and the other as the same world
but posited and unessential,
the connection of ground has indeed been restored.
But it has been restored as the ground-connection of appearance,
namely as the connection,
not of the two sides of an identical content,
nor of a mere diversified content, like law,
but as total connection,
or as negative identity and essential connection
of the opposed sides of the content.
The kingdom of laws is not only this,
that the positedness of a content
is the positedness of an other,
but rather that this identity, as we have seen,
is essentially also negative unity,
and in this negative unity
each of the two sides of law is in it,
therefore, its other content;
consequently, the other is not
an other in general, indeterminedly,
but is its other, equally containing
the content determination of that other;
and thus the two sides are opposed.
Now, because the kingdom of laws now has in it
this negative moment, namely opposition,
and thus, as totality, splits into a world
which exists in and for itself and a world of appearance,
the identity of these two is
the essential connection of opposition.
The connection of ground is, as such, the opposition
which, in its contradiction, has foundered to the ground;
and concrete existence is the ground that has come to itself.
But concrete existence becomes appearance;
ground is sublated in concrete existence;
it reinstates itself as the return of appearance into itself,
but does so as sublated ground, that is to say,
as the ground-connection of opposite determinations;
the identity of such determinations, however, is
essentially a becoming and a transition,
no longer the connection of ground as such.

The world that exists in and for itself is
thus itself a world distinguished within itself,
in the total compass of a manifold content.
That is to say, it is identical with the world of appearance
or the posited world and to this extent it is its ground.
But its identity connection is at the same time
determined as opposition,
because the form of the world of appearance is
reflection into its otherness
and this world of appearance, therefore,
in the world that exists in and for itself
has truly returned into itself,
in such a manner that
that other world is its opposite.
Their connection is, therefore, specifically this,
that the world that exists in and for itself is
the inversion of the world of appearance.
