
B. THE PROCESS

1. It begins with the presupposition
that the objects in tension,
as much as they are tensed against themselves,
just as much are they by that very fact
at first tensed against each other,
a relation which is called their affinity.
Each stands through its concept in contradiction
to its concrete existence's own one-sidedness
and each consequently strives to sublate it,
and in this there is immediately posited
the striving to sublate the one-sidedness of the other
and, through this reciprocal balancing and combining,
to posit a reality conformable to the concept
that contains both moments.

Since each is posited within it
as self-contradictory and self-sublating,
they are held apart from each other
and from their reciprocal complementation
only by external violent force.
The middle term whereby these extremes are
now concluded into a unity is,
first, the implicitly existent nature of both,
the whole concept containing both within.
But, second, since in concrete existence
the two stand over against each other,
their absolute unity is also a still formal element
that concretely exists distinct from them,
the element of communication wherein they enter
into external community with each other.
Since the real difference belongs to the extremes,
this middle term is only the abstract neutrality,
the real possibility of those extremes,
the theoretical element, as it were,
of the concrete existence of the chemical objects,
of their process and its result.
In the realm of bodies, water fulfills
the function of this medium;
in that of spirit, inasmuch as there is in it
an analog of such a relation,
the sign in general, and language more specifically,
can be regarded as fulfilling it.

The relation of the objects,
as mere communication in this element,
is on the one hand a tranquil coming-together,
but on the other it is equally a negative relating,
for in communication the concrete concept
which is their nature is posited in reality,
and the real differences of the object are
thereby reduced to its unity.
Their prior self-subsistent determinateness
is thus sublated in the union that conforms to the concept,
which is one and the same in both;
their opposition and tension are thereby blunted,
with the result that in this reciprocal complementation
the striving attains its tranquil neutrality.

The process is in this way dissolved;
since the contradiction between
concept and reality has been resolved,
the extremes of the syllogism have
consequently lost their opposition
and have ceased to be extremes as
against each other and the middle term.
The product is something neutral, that is,
something in which the ingredients,
which can no longer be called objects,
are no longer in tension
and therefore no longer have
the properties that accrued to them in tension,
though in the product the capacity for
their prior self-subsistence and tension is retained.
For the negative unity of the neutral product proceeds
from a presupposed non-indifference;
the determinateness of the chemical object is
identical with its objectivity; it is original.
Through the process just considered,
this non-indifference is only immediately sublated;
the determinateness, therefore, is
not as yet absolutely reflected into itself,
and consequently the product of the process is
only a formal unity.

2. In this product the tension of opposition,
and the negative unity which is the activity of the process,
are now indeed dissolved.
But since this unity is essential to the concept
and has also itself come into concrete existence,
it is still present but has stepped outside the neutral object.
The process does not spontaneously re-start itself,
for it had non-indifference only as its presupposition;
it did not posit it.
This self-subsistent negativity outside the object,
the concrete existence of the abstract singularity
whose being-for-itself has its reality in
the non-indifferent object,
is in itself now in tension with its abstraction,
an inherently restless activity outwardly bent on consuming.
It connects immediately with the object
whose tranquil neutrality is the real possibility
of an opposition to this neutrality;
the same object is now the middle term
of the prior formal neutrality,
now concrete in itself and determined.

The more precise immediate connection
of the extreme of negative unity with the object is
in that the latter is determined by it
and is thereby disrupted.
This disruption may at first be regarded
as the restoration of the opposition of the objects
in tension with which chemism began.
But this determination does not constitute
the other extreme of the syllogism
but belongs to the immediate connection
of the differentiating principle
with the middle in which this principle
gives itself its immediate reality;
it is the determinateness which the middle term,
besides at the same time being
the universal nature of the subject matter,
possesses in the disjunctive syllogism,
whereby that object is both
objective universality and determinate particularity.
The other extreme of the syllogism stands opposed to the
external self-subsistent extreme of singularity;
it is, therefore, the equally
self-subsisting extreme of universality;
hence the disruption that the real neutrality
of the middle term undergoes in it is
that it breaks up into moments
that are not non-indifferent
but, on the contrary, neutral.
Accordingly these moments are, on the one side,
the abstract and indifferent base,
and, on the other, this base's activating principle
which, separated from it, equally attains
the form of indifferent objectivity.

This disjunctive syllogism is the totality of chemism
in which the same objective whole is
exhibited as self-standing negative unity;
then, in the middle term, as real unity;
and finally as the chemical reality
resolved into its abstract moments.
In these moments the determinateness has
not reached its immanent reflection in an other
as in the neutral product,
but has in itself returned into its abstraction,
an originally determined element.

3. These elemental objects are therefore
liberated from chemical tension;
in them, the original basis of
that presupposition with which chemism began
has been posited through the real process.
Now further, their inner determinateness is
as such essentially the contradiction
of their simple indifferent subsistence
and themselves as determinateness,
and is the outward impulse that disrupts itself
and posits tension in its determined object
and in an other, in order that the object
may have something to which it can relate as non-indifferent,
with which it can neutralize itself
and give to its simple determinateness an existent reality.
Consequently, on the one hand
chemism has gone back to its beginning
in which objects in a state of reciprocal tension
seek one another and then combine in a neutral product
by means of a formal and external middle term;
and, on the other hand,
by thus going back to its concept,
chemism sublates itself
and has gone over into a higher sphere.
