
A. THE RELATION OF WHOLE AND PARTS

First, the essential relation contains the self-subsistence
of concrete existence reflected into itself;
it is then the simple form whose determinations are
indeed also concrete existences,
but they are posited at the same time,
moments held in the unity.
This self-subsistence reflected into itself is
at the same time reflection into its opposite,
namely the immediate self-subsistence,
and its subsistence is this identity with its opposite
no less than its own self-subsistence.
Second, the other side is
thereby also immediately posited.
This is the immediate self-subsistence
which, determined as the other,
is in itself a multifarious manifold,
but in such a way that this manifold also essentially
has within it the reference of the other side,
the unity of the reflected self-subsistence.
That one side, the whole, is the self-subsistence
that constitutes the world existing in and for itself;
the other side, the parts,
is the immediate concrete existence
which was the world of appearance.
In the relation of whole and parts,
the two sides are these self-subsistences
but in such a way that each has the other
reflectively shining in it
and, at the same time, only is as the identity of both.
Now because the essential relation is
at first only the first, immediate relation,
the negative unity and the positive self-subsistence
are bound together by the “also”;
the two sides are indeed both posited as moments,
but equally so as concretely existing self-subsistences.
Their being posited as moments is henceforth so distributed
that the whole, the reflected self-subsistence, is
as concrete self-existent first,
and the other, the immediate, is in it as a moment.
The whole constitutes here the
unity of the two sides, the substrate,
and the immediate concrete existence is as positedness.
Conversely, on the other side which is the side of the parts,
the immediate and internally manifold concrete existence is
the self-subsistent substrate;
the reflected unity, the whole,
is on the contrary only external reference.

2. This relation thus contains
the self-subsistence of the sides,
and their sublatedness no less,
and the two simply in one reference.
The whole is the self-subsistent;
the parts are only moments of this unity,
but they are also equally self-subsistent
and their reflected unity is only a moment;
and each is, in its self-subsistence,
simply the relative of an other.
This relation is within it, therefore,
immediate contradiction, and it sublates itself.

On closer inspection,
the whole is the reflected unity
that stands independently on its own;
but this subsistence that belongs to it
is equally repelled by it;
it is thus self-externalized;
it has its subsistence in its opposite,
in the manifold immediacy, the parts.
The whole thus consists of the parts,
and apart from them it is not anything.
It is therefore the whole relation
and the self-subsistent totality,
but, for precisely this reason,
it is only a relative,
for what makes it a totality is
rather its other, the parts;
it does not have its subsistence
within it but in its other.

The parts, too, are likewise the whole relation.
They are the immediate as against
the reflected self-subsistence,
and do not subsist in the whole
but are for themselves.
Further, they have this whole within them as their moment;
the whole constitutes their connecting reference;
without the whole there are no parts.
But because they are the self-subsistent,
this connection is only an external moment
with respect to which they are
in and for themselves indifferent.
But at the same time the parts,
as manifold concrete existence, collapse together,
for this concrete existence is reflectionless being;
they have their self-subsistence
only in the reflected unity
which is this unity as well as
the concrete existent manifoldness;
this means that they have
self-subsistence only in the whole,
but this whole is at the same time the
self-subsistence which is the other to the parts.

The whole and the parts thus
reciprocally condition each other;
but the relation here considered is
at the same time higher than the
reference of conditioned and condition
to each other as earlier determined.
Here this reference is realized, that is to say,
it is posited that the condition is
the essential self-subsistence of the conditioned
in such a manner that it is presupposed by the latter.
The condition as such is only the immediate,
and it is only implicitly presupposed.
But the whole, through the condition of the parts,
itself immediately entails that it, too,
is only in so far as it has
the parts for presupposition.
Thus, since both sides of the relation
are posited as conditioning each other reciprocally,
each is on its own an immediate self-subsistence,
but their self-subsistence is equally
mediated or posited through the other.
The whole relation, because of this reciprocity,
is the turning back of the conditioning into itself,
the non-relative, the unconditioned.

Now inasmuch as each side of the relation has
its self-subsistence not in it but in its other,
what we have is only one identity of the two
in which they are both only moments;
but inasmuch as each is self-subsistent on its own,
the two are two self-subsistent concrete existences
indifferent to each other.

In the first respect, that of
the essential identity of the two sides,
the whole is equal to the parts
and the parts are equal to the whole.
Nothing is in the whole which is not in the parts,
and nothing is in the parts which is not in the whole.
The whole is not an abstract unity
but the unity of a diversified manifoldness;
but this unity within which the manifold is
held together is the determinateness
by virtue of which the latter is the parts.
The relation has, therefore, an indivisible identity
and only one self-subsistence.

But further, the whole is equal to the parts
but not to them as parts;
the whole is the reflected unity
whereas the parts constitute
the determinate moment
or the otherness of the unity
and are the diversified manifold.
The whole is not equal to them
as this self-subsistent diversity
but to them together.
But this, their “together,” is
nothing else but their unity,
the whole as such.
In the parts, therefore, the whole
is only equal to itself,
and the equality of it and the parts expresses
only this tautology,
namely that the whole as whole is equal
not to the parts but to the whole.

Conversely, the parts are equal to the whole;
but because, as parts,
they are the moment of otherness,
they are not equal to it as the unity,
but in such a way that one of the whole's
manifold determinations maps over a part,
or that they are equal to the whole as manifold,
and this is to say that they are equal to it
as an apportioned whole, that is, as parts.
Here we thus have the same tautology,
that the parts as parts are equal
not to the whole as such
but, in the whole, to themselves.

The whole and the parts thus
fall indifferently apart;
each side refers only to itself.
But, as so held apart, they destroy themselves.
The whole which is indifferent towards the parts is
abstract identity, undifferentiated in itself.
Identity is a whole only inasmuch
as it is differentiated in itself,
so differentiated indeed that the manifold
determinations are reflected into themselves
and have immediate self-subsistence.
And the identity of reflection has
shown through its movement
that it has this reflection
into its other for its truth.
In just the same way are the parts,
as indifferent to the unity of the whole,
only the unconnected manifold,
the inherently other which, as such,
is the other of itself and only sublates itself.
This self-reference of each of the two sides
is their self-subsistence;
but this self-subsistence which
each side has for itself is rather
the negation of their respective selves.
Each side has its self-subsistence, therefore,
not within but in the other side;
this other, which constitutes the subsistence,
is its presupposed immediate which is supposed
to be the first and its starting point;
but this first of each side is itself
only a first which is not first
but has its beginning in its other.

The truth of the relation consists
therefore in the mediation;
its essence is the negative unity
in which both the reflected
and the existent immediacy
are equally sublated.
The relation is the contradiction
that returns to its ground,
into the unity which,
as turning back,
is reflected unity
but which, since it has
equally posited itself as sublated,
refers to itself negatively
and makes itself into existent immediacy.
But this unity's negative reference,
in so far as it is a first and an immediate,
only is as mediated by its other
and equally as posited.
This other, the existent immediacy,
is equally only as sublated;
its self-subsistence is a first,
but only in order to disappear,
and it has an existence
which is posited and mediated.

Determined in this way, the relation is
no longer one of whole and parts.
The previous immediacy of its sides has
passed over into positedness and mediation.
Each side is posited, in so far as it is immediate,
as self-sublating and as passing over into the other;
and, in so far as it is itself negative reference,
it is at the same time posited as conditioned
through the other, as through its positive.
And the same applies to the immediate transition of each;
it is equally a mediation, a sublating
which is posited through the other.
Thus the relation of whole and parts has passed over
into the relation of force and its expressions.
