SECTION II

Objectivity

In Book One of the Objective Logic,
abstract being was presented as
passing over into existence,
but at the same time as
retreating into essence.

In Book Two, essence shows itself as
determining itself as ground,
thereby stepping into concrete existence
and realizing itself as substance,
but at the same time
retreating into the concept.

Of the concept, we have now first shown
that it determines itself as objectivity.
It should be obvious that this latter transition is
essentially the same as the proof from the concept,
that is to say, from the concept of God to his existence,
that was formerly found in Metaphysics,
or the so-called ontological proof.
Equally well known is that
Descartes's sublimest thought,
that God is that whose concept
includes his being within itself,
after having degenerated into
the bad form of the formal syllogism,
namely into the form of the said proof,
finally succumbed to the Critique of Reason
and to the thought that existence
cannot be extracted from the concept.
Some elucidations concerning this proof
have already been made earlier.
In Volume I, pp. 47 ff.,
where being has vanished into
its closest opposite, non-being,
and becoming has shown itself
to be the truth of both,
attention was called to the
confusion that arises in the case
of a determinate existence
when we concentrate,
not on its being,
but on its determinate content,
and then imagine if we compare
this determinate content
(e.g. one hundred dollars)
with another determinate content
(e.g. the context of my perception, of my financial situation)
and discover that it makes indeed a difference
whether the one content is added to the other or not;
that we are dealing with the distinction of being and non-being,
or even the distinction of being and the concept.
Further, in the same Volume
on pp. 64ff. and on p. 289 of Volume II,
the definition of a sum-total of all reality
which occurs in the ontological proof was elucidated.
But the essential subject matter of that proof,
the connectedness of concept and existence,
is the concern of the treatment of the concept just concluded
and of the entire course that the latter traverses
in determining itself to objectivity.
The concept, as absolutely
self-identical negativity,
is self-determining;
it was noted that the concept,
in resolving itself into judgment in singularity,
already posits itself as something real, an existent;
this still abstract reality completes itself in objectivity.

Now it might appear that the transition
from the concept into objectivity
is quite another thing than the transition
from the concept of God to God's existence.
But, on the one hand, it must be borne in mind
that the determinate content, God,
makes no difference in a logical progression,
and that the ontological proof is
only one application of this logical progression
to that particular content.
On the other hand, it is essential to be
reminded of the remark made above that
the subject obtains determinateness
and content only in its predicate;
that prior to the predicate,
whatever that content might otherwise be for
feeling, intuition, and representation,
so far as conceptual cognition is concerned
it is only a name;
but in the predicate, with determinateness,
there begins at the same time
the process of realization in general.
The predicates, however, must be grasped as
themselves still confined within the concept,
hence as something subjective with which
no move to existence has yet been made;
even for this reason, in judgment the realization of
the concept is certainly not completed yet.
But there is the further reason that
the mere determination of a subject matter through predicates,
without this determination being at the same time
the realization and objectification of the concept,
remains something so subjective that it is not even
a true cognition and determination of the
concept of the subject matter;
“subjective” in the sense of abstract reflection
and non-conceptual representation.
God as living God, and better still as absolute spirit,
is only recognized in what he does.
Humankind were directed early to recognize God in his works;
only from these can the determinations proceed
that can be called his properties,
and in which his being is also contained.
It is thus the conceptual comprehension of God's activity,
that is to say, of God himself,
that recognizes the concept of God in his being
and his being in his concept.
Being by itself, or even existence,
are such a poor and restricted determination,
that the difficulty of finding them in the concept
may well be due to not having considered
what being or existence themselves are.
Being as entirely abstract, immediate self-reference,
is nothing but the abstract moment of the concept;
it is its moment of abstract universality
that also provides what is required of being,
namely that it be outside the concept,
for inasmuch as universality is a moment of the concept,
it is also its difference or the abstract judgment
wherein the concept opposes itself to itself.
The concept, even as formal, already immediately contains
being in a truer and richer form,
in that, as self-referring negativity,
it is singularity.

But of course the difficulty of finding
being in the concept in general,
and equally so in the concept of God,
becomes insuperable if we expect
being to be something that
we find in the context of external experience
or in the form of sense-perception,
like the one hundred dollars
in the context of my finances,
as something graspable only by hand,
not by spirit, essentially visible to
the external and not the internal eye;
in other words, if the name of
being, reality, truth, is given
to that which things possess
as sensuous, temporal, and perishable.
The consequence of a philosophizing
that in regard to being fails
to rise above the senses is
that, in regard to the concept,
it also fails to let go of
merely abstract thought;
such thought stands opposed to being.

The customary practice of regarding
the concept as something just as one-sided
as abstract thought will already stand in the way
of accepting what has just been suggested,
namely, that we regard the transition of
the concept of God to his being as
an application of the logical course
of objectification of the concept presented above.
Yet if it is granted, as it commonly is,
that the logical element, as the formal element,
constitutes the form for the cognition
of every determinate content,
then that application at least
would have to be conceded,
unless even at the opposition of
concept and objectivity in general
one stops short at the untrue concept
and an equally untrue reality as an ultimate.
But in the exposition of the pure concept
it was further indicated that the latter is
the absolute divine concept itself.
In truth, therefore, what takes place is
not a relation of application
but the immediate display in the logical course
of God's self-determination as being.
But on this point it is to be remarked
that inasmuch as the concept is to be
presented as the concept of God,
it ought be apprehended as it is
when already taken up in the idea.
The said pure concept passes through
the finite forms of the judgment
and the syllogism precisely
because it is not yet posited
in and for itself as one with objectivity,
but is conceived rather only in
the process of becoming that objectivity.
The latter, too, is not yet the divine concrete existence,
not yet the reality reflectively shining in the idea.
And yet objectivity is just that much richer and higher
than the being or existence of the ontological proof,
as the pure concept is richer and
higher than that metaphysical vacuum
of the sum-total of all reality.
But I reserve for another occasion
the task of elucidating in greater detail
the manifold misunderstanding brought
upon the ontological proof of God's existence,
and also on the rest of the other so-called proofs,
by logical formalism.
We shall also elucidate Kant's critique of such proofs
in order to establish their true meaning
and thus restore the thoughts on which they are based
to their worth and dignity.

We have previously called attention to
the several forms of immediacy
that have already come on the scene,
but in different determinations.
In the sphere of being, immediacy is
being itself and existence;
in the sphere of essence,
it is concrete existence
and then actuality and substantiality;
in the sphere of the concept,
besides being immediacy as abstract universality,
it is now objectivity.
These expressions, when the exactitude
of philosophical conceptual distinctions is
not at stake, may be used as synonymous;
but the determinations are derived
from the necessity of the concept.
Being is as such the first immediacy,
and existence is the same immediacy
with a first determinateness.
Concrete existence, along with the thing,
is the immediacy that proceeds from ground,
from the self-sublating mediation
of the simple reflection of essence.
But actuality and substantiality are
the immediacy that proceeds from
the sublated difference of the still unessential
concrete existence as appearance and its essentiality.
Finally, objectivity is the immediacy
as which the concept has determined itself
by the sublation of its abstraction and mediation.
It is the privilege of philosophy to choose
such expressions from the language of ordinary life,
which is made for the world of imaginary representations,
as seem to approximate the determinations of the concept.
There is no question of demonstrating
for a word chosen from ordinary life
that in ordinary life too the same concept is associated
with that for which philosophy uses it,
for ordinary life has no concepts,
only representations of the imagination,
and to recognize the concept in what is otherwise
mere representation is philosophy itself.
It must therefore suffice if representation,
for those of its expressions
that philosophy uses for its definitions,
has only some rough approximation
of their distinctive difference;
it may also be the case that in these expressions
one recognizes pictorial adumbrations
which, as approximations, are close indeed to the
corresponding concepts.
One will be hard pressed, perhaps,
to concede that something can be
without actually existing;
but at least nobody will mistake, for instance,
being as the copula of the judgment
for the expression “to exist actually,”
and nobody will say that
“this article exists dear, suitable, etc.,”
“gold exists a metal or metallic,”
instead of “this article is dear, suitable, etc.,”
“gold is a metal.”
And surely it is common to distinguish
being from appearing,
appearance from actuality,
as also being as contrasted to actuality,
and still more all these expressions from objectivity.
But even if such expressions were used synonymously,
philosophy would in any case have the freedom
to take advantage of such empty superfluity of language
for the purpose of its distinctions.

Mention was made in connection with the apodictic judgment
where judgment attains completion
and the subject thus loses its determinateness
as against the predicate,
of the double meaning of subjectivity originating from it,
namely the subjectivity of the concept
and equally so of the externality
and contingency confronting the concept.
A similar objectivity also appears for the double meaning,
of standing opposed to the self-subsistent concept
yet of also existing in and for itself.
In the former sense, the object stands opposed
to the “I = I” which in subjective idealism
is declared to be the absolute truth.
It is then the manifold world in its immediate existence
with which the “I” or the concept is engaged in endless struggle,
in order, by the negation of the inherently nullity of this other,
to give to its first certainty of being a self,
the actual truth of its equality with itself.
In a broader sense, it means a subject matter in general
for whatever interest or activity of the subject.

In the opposite sense, however,
the objective signifies that which exists in and for itself,
without restriction and opposition.
Rational principles, perfect works of art, etc.,
are said to be objective to the extent
that they are free and above every accidentality.
Although rational principles, whether theoretical or ethical,
only belong to the sphere of the subjective, to consciousness,
this aspect of the latter of existing in and for itself
is nonetheless called objective;
the cognition of truth is made to rest on
the cognition of the object as free of
any addition by subjective reflection,
and right conduct on the adherence to objective laws,
such as are not of subjective origin
and are immune to arbitrariness
and to treatment that would compromise their necessity.

At the present standpoint of our treatise,
objectivity has the meaning first of all of
the being in and for itself of the concept
that has sublated the mediation posited
in its self-determination,
raising it to immediate self-reference.
This immediacy is therefore itself
immediately and entirely pervaded by the concept,
just as its totality is immediately identical with its being.
But further, since the concept equally has to restore
the free being-for-itself of its subjectivity,
it enters with respect to objectivity
into a relation of purpose
in which the immediacy of the objectivity
becomes a negative for it,
something to be determined through its activity.
This immediacy thus acquires the other significance,
namely that in and for itself,
in so far as it stands opposed to the concept,
it is a nullity.

First, then, objectivity is in its immediacy.
Its moments, on account of the totality of all moments,
stand in self-subsistent indifference
as objects each outside the other,
and as so related they possess
the subjective unity of the concept
only as inner or as outer.
This is mechanism.

But, second, inasmuch as in mechanism that unity
reveals itself to be the immanent law of the objects,
their relation becomes one of non-indifference,
each specifically different according to law;
a connection in which the objects'
determinate self-subsistence is sublated.
This is chemism.

Third, this essential unity of the objects is
thereby posited as distinct from their self-subsistence.
It is the subjective concept,
but posited as referring in and for itself
to the objectivity, as purpose.
This is teleology.

Since purpose is the concept posited
as within it referring to objectivity,
and through itself sublating its defect
of being subjective,
the at first external purposiveness becomes,
through the realization of the purpose, internal.
It becomes idea.
