A. THE RELATION OF SUBSTANTIALITY

Absolute necessity is absolute relation
because it is not being as such
but being that is because it is,
being as the absolute mediation
of itself with itself.
This being is substance;
as the final unity of essence and being,
it is the being in all being.
It is neither the unreflected immediate,
nor something abstract standing behind
concrete existence and appearance,
but the immediate actuality itself,
and it is this actuality
as being absolutely reflected into itself,
as a subsisting that exists in and for itself.
Substance, as this unity of being and reflection,
is essentially the shining and the positedness of itself.
The shining is a self-referring shining, thus it is;
this being is substance as such.
Conversely, this being is only the self-identical positedness,
and as such it is shining totality, accidentality.

This shining is identity as identity of form,
the unity of possibility and actuality.
It is becoming at first,
contingency as the sphere of
coming-to-be and passing-away;
for in the determination of immediacy
the connection of possibility and actuality is
the immediate conversion of the two
into each other as existents,
of each into its other as only an other to it.
But because being is shine,
their relation is also one of identical terms
or of terms shining in one another, that is, reflection.
The movement of accidentality, therefore,
exhibits in each of its moments the mutual
reflective shine of the categories of being
and of the reflective determinations of essence.
The immediate something has a content;
its immediacy is at the same time
reflected indifference towards the form.
This content is determinate,
and because this determinateness is one of being,
the something passes over into an other.
But quality is also a determinateness of reflection;
as such, it is indifferent diversity.
But this diversity is animated into opposition,
and returns to the ground which is the nothing,
but also immanent reflection.
This reflection sublates itself;
but it is itself also reflected in-itselfness:
so it is possibility, and this in-itselfness,
in its transition which is equally immanent reflection,
is necessary actuality.

This movement of accidentality is the actuosity of substance
as the tranquil coming forth of itself.
It is not active against something,
but only against itself as a simple unresisting element.
The sublating of a presupposition is the disappearing shine;
only in the act of sublating the immediate does this
immediate itself come to be, or is that shining;
the beginning that begins from itself is first of all
the positing of this itself from which the beginning is made.

Substance, as this identity of the reflective shining,
is the totality of the whole and embraces accidentality in itself,
and accidentality is the whole substance itself.
Its differentiation into the simple identity
of being and the flux of accidents
within it is one form of its shining.
That simple being is the formless substance of the imagination
for which the shine has not determined itself as shine,
but which holds on, as on an absolute,
to this indeterminate identity that has no truth
but only is the determinateness of immediate actuality,
or equally so of in-itselfness or possibility,
form determinations that fall into accidentality.
The other determination, the flux of accidents,
is the absolute form-unity of accidentality,
substance as absolute power.
The ceasing-to-be of the accident is
its return as actuality into itself,
as into its in-itself or into its possibility;
but this, its in-itself, is itself only a positedness
and therefore also actuality,
and because these form determinations are
equally determinations of content,
this possible is an actual differently determined
also according to content.
Substance manifests itself through the actuality,
with the content of the latter into which
it translates the possible, as creative power,
and, through the possibility to which
it reduces the actual, as destructive power;
the creating is destructive and the destructing creative,
for the negative and the positive, possibility and negativity
are in substantial necessity absolutely united.

The accidents as such, and there are several of them,
because plurality is one of the determinations of being,
have no power over each other.
They are the immediately existent something,
or the something that immediately exists for itself;
concretely existing things of manifold properties;
or wholes consisting of parts, self-subsisting parts;
forces in need of reciprocal solicitation
and conditioning each other.
In so far as such an accidental
being seems to exercise a power over an other,
that power is that of substance that
encompasses them both within itself
and, as negativity, posits an inequality of value:
one it determines as ceasing-to-be
and another as having a different content
and as coming-to-be,
the one as passing over into its possibility
and the other into actuality
accordingly ever dividing itself
into this difference of form and content
and ever purifying itself of this one-sidedness,
but in this purification ever falling back
into determination and division.
One accident thus drives out another
only because its own subsisting is
this very totality of form and content
into which it, as well as its other, equally perishes.

Because of this immediate identity and presence
of substance in the accidents,
there is still no real difference present.
In this first determination, substance is not yet manifested
according to its whole concept.
When substance, as self-identical being-in-and-for-itself,
is differentiated from itself as a totality of accidents,
it is substance itself, as power, that mediates the difference.
This power is necessity, the positive persistence
of the accidents in their negativity
and their mere positedness in their subsistence;
this middle is thus the unity of
substantiality and accidentality themselves,
a middle whose extremes have no subsistence of their own.
Substantiality is, therefore, only
the relation as immediately vanishing;
it refers to itself not as a negative
and, as the immediate unity of power with itself,
is in the form only of its identity,
not of its negative essence;
only one of its moments,
that of negativity or of difference,
vanishes altogether;
the other moment of identity does not.

Another way of considering the matter is this.

The shine or the accidentality is indeed
in itself substance by virtue of the power,
but is not thus posited as this self-identical shine;
and therefore substance has only the accidentality,
not itself, for its shape or positedness;
it is not substance as substance.
The relation of substantiality is at first, therefore, only this,
that substance manifests itself as a formal power
whose differences are not substantial;
in fact, substance only is as the inner of the accidents,
and these only are in the substance.
Or this relation is only the shining of totality as becoming;
but it is equally reflection and, for this reason,
the accidentality which substance is in itself is also posited as such;
it is thus determined as self-referring negativity over against itself,
determined as self-referring simple identity with itself;
and it is substance that exists in and for itself,
substance endowed with power.
Thus the relation of substantiality passes over
into the relation of causality.

