C. THE GENUS

The living individual, at first cut off
from the universal concept of life,
is a presupposition yet unproven through itself.
Through its process with
the simultaneously presupposed world,
it has posited itself for itself as
the negative unity of its otherness,
as the foundation of itself;
thus it is the actuality of the idea,
so that the individual now brings
itself forth out of actuality,
whereas before it proceeded
only from the concept,
and its coming to be,
which was a presupposing,
now becomes its production.

But the further determination
that it has attained by
the sublation of the opposition is
that it is genus,
identity of itself with its
hitherto indifferent otherness.
This idea of the individual,
since it is this essential identity,
is essentially the particularization of itself.
This particularization, its disruption,
in keeping with the totality from which it proceeds,
is the duplication of the individual
the presupposing of an objectivity
which is identical with it,
and a relating of the living being to itself
as to another living being.

This universal is the third stage,
the truth of life in so far as
life is still shut up within itself.
This stage is the process of
the individual as it refers to itself,
where the externality is
the individual's immanent moment
and is, besides, itself a living totality,
an objectivity which for the individual
is the individual itself
an externality in which the individual has
certainty of itself not as being sublated,
but as subsisting.

Now because the relation of genus is
the identity of individual self-feeling
in such a one who is at the same time
another self-subsistent individual,
it is a contradiction;
accordingly, the living being is once more impulse.
The genus is indeed now the completion of the idea of life,
but at first it is still within the sphere of immediacy;
this universality is therefore actual in a singular shape;
it is the concept whose reality has
the form of immediate objectivity.
And consequently the individual, although it is the genus,
it is the genus in itself rather than for itself;
what is for it is as yet only another living individual;
the concept distinguished from itself has for object,
with which it is identical, not itself as concept,
but a concept rather that as a living being has
at the same time external objectivity for it,
a form which is therefore immediately reciprocal.

The identity with the other individual,
the universality of the individual,
is thus still only inner or subjective;
it therefore has the longing to posit
this identity and to realize itself as universal.
But this impulse of the genus can realize itself
only through the sublation of the singular individualities
which are still particular to each other.
At first, in so far as it is these individualities
which, in themselves universal, themselves satisfy
the tension of their longing and dissolve themselves
into the universality of their genus,
their realized identity is
the negative unity of the genus
reflecting itself into itself out of its rupture.
To this extent, it is the individuality of life itself,
no longer generated out of its concept
but out of the actual idea.
At first, it is itself only the concept
that still has to objectify itself,
but a concept which is actual
the germ of a living individual.
To ordinary perception what the concept is,
and that the subjective concept has external actuality,
are visibly present in it.
For the germ of the living being is
the complete concretion of individuality:
it is where all the living being's diverse sides,
its properties and articulated differences,
are contained in their entire determinateness;
where the at first immaterial, subjective totality is
present undeveloped, simple and non-sensuous.
Thus the germ is the whole living being
in the inner form of the concept.

From this side the genus obtains actuality
through its reflection into itself,
for the moment of negative unity
and individuality is thereby posited in it
the propagation of the living species.
The idea, which as life is still
in the form of immediacy,
thus falls back into actuality,
and its reflection is now only
the repetition and the infinite process
in which it does not step outside
the finitude of its immediacy.
But this going back to its first concept also has
the higher side that the idea has not only run through
the mediation of its processes inside immediacy,
but, just because it has run through them,
has sublated this immediacy
and has thereby elevated itself
to a higher form of its existence.

That is to say, the process of the genus
in which the single individuals sublate in one another
their indifferent, immediate, concrete existence,
and in this negative unity die away,
has further the realized genus
that has posited itself as identical
with the concept for the other side of its product.
In the process of the genus,
the isolated singularities of individual life perish;
the negative identity in which
the genus turns back into itself is
on the one side the generation of
singularity just as it is also,
on the other side, the sublation of it
is thus the genus rejoining itself,
the universality of the idea as
it comes to be explicitly for itself.
In copulation, the immediacy of
living individuality perishes;
the death of this life is
the coming to be of spirit.
The idea, implicit as genus, becomes explicit
in that it has sublated its particularity
that constituted the living species,
and has thereby given itself a reality
which is itself simple universality;
thus it is the idea that relates
itself to itself as idea,
the universal that has universality
for its determinateness and existence.
This is the idea of cognition.

