A. THE LIVING INDIVIDUAL

1. The concept of life or universal life is the immediate idea,
the concept that has an objectivity corresponding to it;
but the objectivity corresponds to it only to the extent
that the concept is the negative unity of this externality,
that is to say, posits it as corresponding to it.
The infinite reference of the concept to itself is
as negativity a self-determining,
the diremption of itself within itself
as subjective singularity
and itself as indifferent universality.
The idea of life in its immediacy is as yet
only the creative universal soul.
Because of this immediacy,
the first internal negative reference of the idea
is the self-determination of itself as concept
an implicit positing which is explicit only
as a turning back into itself;
this is the creative presupposing.
By virtue of this self-determining,
universal life is particularized;
it has thus split itself into
the two extremes of the judgment
which immediately becomes syllogism.

The determinations of the opposition are
the universal determinations of the concept,
for the splitting into two is
the affair of the concept;
the filling of them, however, is the idea.
One determination is the unity of
the concept and of reality,
which is the idea as the immediate unity
that earlier assumed the form of objectivity.
Here, however, it is in another determination.
There, it was the unity of the concept and of reality
in so far as the concept has gone over into reality
and is lost in it;
it did not stand opposite to it, or,
since it is for the reality only an inner,
it is itself for it only an external reflection.
the immediate itself in immediate mode.
Here, on the contrary, it has proceeded
only from the concept,
so that its essence is positedness,
or that it exists as negative.
It is to be regarded as the side of
the universality of the concept,
hence as an abstract universality,
essentially only inhering in the subject
and in the form of immediate being
which, posited for itself, is
indifferent to the subject.
Hence the totality of the concept
that attaches to the objectivity is,
as it were, only lent to it;
the last self-subsistence that
objectivity has over against the subject
is this being whose truth is only
that moment of the concept
in which the latter, as a presupposing,
is in the first determinateness of
a positing that exists implicitly
and is not yet as positing,
as immanently reflected unity.
Having proceeded from the idea,
self-subsisting objectivity is
therefore immediate being only as
the predicate of the judgment of
the concept's self-determination,
a being that is indeed distinct from the subject
but is at the same time essentially posited as
a moment of the concept.

According to content, this objectivity is
the totality of the concept, a totality,
however, that has the subjectivity of the concept,
or its negative unity, standing over against it,
and this subjectivity or negativity is
what constitutes the true centrality,
that is to say, the concept's free unity with itself.
This subject is the idea in the form of singularity,
as simple but negative self-identity,
the living individual.

This individual is in the first place life as soul,
as the concept of itself, fully determined within itself,
the initiating self-moving principle.
In its simplicity the concept contains determinate externality,
as a simple moment enclosed within itself.
But, further, this soul is
in its immediacy immediately external,
and has an objective being within it,
a reality which is subjugated to purpose, the immediate means,
at first the objectivity which is predicated of the subject,
but then also the middle term of the syllogism,
for the corporeity of the soul is that
whereby the soul links itself to external objectivity.
The living being has this corporeity at first as a reality
immediately identical with the concept;
to this extent, the corporeity has
this reality in general by nature.

Now because this objectivity is
the predicate of the individual
and is taken up in the subjective unity,
the earlier determinations of the objects
do not attach to it,
not the relation of mechanism or of chemism,
and even less so the reflective relations
of whole and part, and the like.
As externality, it is indeed capable of such relations,
but to that extent it is no longer a living being;
when a living thing is taken to be a whole consisting of parts,
something exposed to the action of mechanical or chemical causes,
itself a mechanical or chemical product
(whether merely as such or as also
determined by some external purpose),
then the concept is taken as external to it,
the individual itself as something dead.
Since the concept is immanent in it,
the purposiveness of the living being
is to be grasped as inner;
it is present in it as a determinate concept,
distinguished from its externality
but, in thus distinguishing itself from it,
pervading it thoroughly and self-identical.
This objectivity of the living being is the organism;
it is the means and instrument of purpose, fully purposive,
for the concept constitutes its substance;
but precisely for this reason this means and instrument
is itself the accomplished purpose
in which the subjective purpose thus
immediately closes in upon itself.
As for its externality,
the organism is a manifold,
not of parts but of members.
(a) These members exist as such
only in the individuality;
they are separable inasmuch as they are external
and can be grasped in this externality,
but as thus separated they revert to
the mechanical and chemical relations
of common objectivity.
(b) Their externality is opposed to
the negative unity of the living individuality.
This individuality is therefore the impulse
 to posit as a concretely real difference
the otherwise abstract moment of
the determinateness of the concept;
and since this concretely real
difference exists as immediate,
it is the impulse of each singular,
specific moment to produce itself
and equally to raise its particularity to universality,
to sublate the other moments external to it
and promote itself at their cost,
but no less to sublate itself
and make itself a means for the other.

2. This process of the living individuality
is restricted to itself
and still falls entirely within the individuality.
The first premise of the syllogism of external purposiveness,
where the purpose immediately refers to objectivity
and makes it a means,
was earlier taken in the sense that
although in it the purpose remains self-equal
and has gone back into itself,
the objectivity has not yet sublated itself within,
and consequently the purpose is not
in it in and for itself
but becomes such only in the conclusion.
The process of the living being
with itself is this same premise,
but in so far as the premise is also the conclusion,
in so far as the immediate reference of
the subject to the objectivity,
by virtue of which the latter
becomes means and instrument,
is at the same time the negative unity
of the concept within itself,
the purpose realizes itself in this externality
by being the subjective power over it
and the process in which the externality
displays its self-dissolution
and its return into this
negative unity of the purpose.
The unrest and the mutability
of the external side of the living being is
the manifestation in it of the concept,
and the concept,
as in itself negativity,
has objectivity in so far as
this objectivity's indifferent subsistence
shows itself to be self-sublating.
Thus the concept produces itself
through its impulse in such a way
that the product, being its essence,
is itself the producing factor:
is product, in other words, only as an externality
that equally posits itself negatively,
or as the process of production.

3. Now the idea as just considered is
the concept of the living subject and of its process;
the determinations that stand in relation to one another are
the self-referring negative unity of the concept
and the objectivity which is the concept's means
but also where the concept has returned into itself.
But since these moments of the idea of life
do not go past the concept of life,
they are not the determinate conceptual moments of the living
individual in its reality.
This individual's objectivity or its corporeity
is a concrete totality;
those moments are the sides out of which
the living reality constitutes itself;
they are not, therefore, the moments of this reality
as already constituted by the idea.
But the living objectivity of the individual,
since as objectivity it is ensouled by the concept
and has the latter for its substance,
has also in it, for its essential difference,
such determinations as pertain to the concept,
universality, particularity, and singularity;
hence the shape in which the determinations in it are
externally differentiated is divided or incised (insectum)
in accordance with these.

Thus that shape is in this instance universality,
the purely internal pulsating of living reality, sensibility.
The concept of universality, as we saw it earlier,
is the simple immediacy which is such, however,
only as inherently absolute negativity.
This concept of absolute difference with
its negativity dissolved into simplicity and self-equal,
is brought to intuition in sensibility.
It is the in-itselfness not as abstract simplicity,
but as an infinite determinable receptivity
that does not become in its determinateness
anything manifold and external
but is absolutely reflected into itself.
Determinateness is present in this universality as simple principle;
the singular external determinateness, the so-called impression,
goes back from its external and manifold determination
into this simplicity of self-feeling.
Sensibility may therefore be regarded
as the external existence of the inward soul,
for it takes in all externality but reduces it
to the complete simplicity of self-equal universality.

The second determination of the concept is particularity.
This is the moment of posited difference,
the opening up of the negativity otherwise
locked up in simple self-feeling
or present in it as abstractly ideal,
not yet concretely real determinateness.
It is irritability.
Because of the abstraction of its negativity,
feeling is impulse;
it determines itself;
the self-determination of the living being is
its judgment or the self-limiting whereby
it refers to the outside as to a presupposed objectivity
with which it is in reciprocal activity.
The living being, as a particular,
now stands on one side as one species
next to other species;
the formal reflection of
this indifferent diversity into itself
is the formal genus and its systematization;
but the individual reflection is this,
that as outwardly directed the particularity,
the negativity of the living being's determinateness,
is the self-referring negativity of the concept.

According to this third determination,
the living being is a singular.
This immanent reflection further
 determines itself in such a way
that in irritability the living being is
the externality of itself as against itself,
as against the objectivity
that it possesses immediately
as its means and instrument
and which is externally determinable.
The immanent reflection sublates this immediacy:
on the one side as theoretical reflection,
that is, in so far as the negativity is
the simple moment of sensibility
as was considered in the latter,
and which constitutes feeling;
on the other side as real reflection,
in that the unity of the concept posits itself
in its externality as negative unity,
and this is reproduction.
The two first moments, sensibility and irritability,
are abstract determinations;
in reproduction life is something concrete and vital;
in it alone does it also have feeling and power of resistance.
Reproduction is the negativity as simple moment of sensibility,
and irritability is only a vital power of resistance,
so that the relation to the external is
reproduction and identity of the individual with itself.
Each singular moment is essentially the totality of all;
their difference constitutes the ideal determination of form
which is posited in reproduction as
the concrete totality of the whole.
On the one hand, therefore, this whole is opposed
to the previous determinate totalities as a third,
namely as a concretely real totality;
on the other hand, however, it is their implicit essentiality
and also that in which they are comprehended as moments
and where they have their subject and subsistence.

With reproduction as a moment of singularity,
the living being posits itself as actual individuality,
a self-referring being-for-itself;
but it is at the same time a real outward reference,
the reflection of particularity or irritability
as against an other, as against the objective world.
The life-process enclosed within the individual
passes over into a reference to
the presupposed objectivity as such,
by virtue of the fact that,
as the individual posits itself as subjective totality,
the moment of its determinateness,
its reference to externality,
also becomes a totality.

