
b. Alternating determination of finite and infinite

The infinite is;
in this immediacy it is at the same time
the negation of an other, of the finite.
And so, as existent and at the same time as the
non-being of an other,
it has fallen back into the category of the something,
of something determinate in general.
More precisely: the infinite is
the existence reflected into itself
which results from the mediating sublation
of determinateness in general
and is consequently posited as existence
distinct from its determinateness;
therefore, it has fallen back into
the category of something with a limit.
In accordance with this determinateness,
the finite stands over against
the infinite as real existence;
they thus remain outside each other,
standing in qualitative mutual reference;
the immediate being of the infinite
resurrects the being of its negation,
of the finite again, which seemed at first
to have vanished into the infinite.

But the infinite and the finite are not
in these referential categories only;
the two sides are further determined in addition
to being as mere others to each other.
Namely, the finite is restriction posited as restriction;
it is existence posited with the determination
that it passes over into what is its in-itself
and becomes infinite.
Infinity is the nothing of the finite,
the in-itself that the latter ought to be,
but it is this at the same time
as reflected within itself,
as realized ought, as only
affirmative self-referring being.
In infinity we have the satisfaction
that all determinateness, alteration, all restriction
and the ought itself together with it,
have vanished, are sublated,
and the nothing of the finite is posited.
As this negation of the finite is
the being-in-itself determined which,
as negation of negation, is in itself affirmative.
Yet this affirmation is qualitatively
immediate self-reference, being;
and, because of this, the affirmative is led back
to the category of being that has
the finite confronting it as an other;
its negative nature is posited as existent negation,
and hence as first and immediate negation.
The infinite is in this way burdened
with the opposition to the finite,
and this finite, as an other, remains a real existence
even though in its being-in-itself, in the infinite,
it is at the same time posited as sublated;
this infinite is that which is not finite:
a being in the determinateness of negation.
Contrasted with the finite,
with the series of existent determinacies,
of realities,
the infinite is indeterminate emptiness,
the beyond of the finite,
whose being-in-itself is not in its existence
(which is something determinate).

As thus posited over against the finite,
the two connected by the qualitative mutual reference of others,
the infinite is to be called the bad infinite,
the infinite of the understanding,
for which it counts as the highest,
the absolute truth.
The understanding believes that
it has attained satisfaction
in the reconciliation of truth
while it is in fact entangled in
unreconciled, unresolved, absolute contradictions.
And it is these contradictions,
into which it falls on every side whenever
it embarks on the application and explication
of these categories that belong to it,
that must make it conscious of the fact.

This contradiction is present in the very fact
that the infinite remains over against the finite,
with the result that there are two determinacies.
There are two worlds, one infinite and one finite,
and in their connection the infinite is only
the limit of the finite and thus only a determinate,
itself finite infinite.

This contradiction develops its content into more explicit forms.
The finite is the real existence which persists as such
even when it has gone over into its non-being, the infinite.
As we have seen, this infinite has for its determinateness,
over against the finite,
only the first, immediate negation,
just as the finite, as negated,
has over against this negation
only the meaning of an other
and is, therefore, still a something.
When, therefore, the understanding,
elevating itself above this finite world,
rises to what is the highest for it,
to the infinite,
the finite world remains for it
as something on this side here,
and, thus posited only above the finite,
the infinite is separated from the finite
and, for the same reason,
the finite from the infinite:
each is placed in a different location,
the finite as existence here,
and the infinite, although the being-in-itself of the finite,
there as a beyond, at a nebulous, inaccessible distance
outside which there stands, enduring, the finite.

As thus separated, they are just as much
essentially connected with each other,
through the very negation that divides them.
This negation connecting them
(these somethings reflected into themselves)
is the common limit of each over against the other;
and that, too, in such a way that each
does not merely have this limit in it over against the other,
but the negation is rather the in-itselfness of each;
each thus has for itself, in its separation
from the other, the limit in it.
But the limit is the first negation;
both are thus limited, finite, in themselves.
Yet, as each affirmatively refers itself to itself,
each is also the negation of its limit;
each thus immediately repels
the negation from itself as its non-being,
and, qualitatively severed from it,
posits it as an other being outside it:
the finite posits its non-being as this infinite,
and the infinite likewise the finite.
It is readily conceded that the
finite passes over into the infinite necessarily
(that is, through its determination)
and is thereby elevated to what is its in-itself,
for while the finite is indeed determined as subsistent existence,
it is at the same time also a null in itself
and therefore destined to self-dissolution;
whereas the infinite, although burdened with negation and limit,
is equally also determined as the existent in-itself,
so that this abstraction of self-referring affirmation is
what constitutes its determination,
and hence finite existence is not present in it.
But it has been shown that the infinite itself
attains affirmative being only by the mediation of negation,
as negation of negation,
and that when its affirmation thus attained is
taken as just simple, qualitative being,
the negation contained in it is demoted
to simple immediate negation
and, therefore, to determinateness and limit;
and these, then, are excluded from the infinite
as contradicting its in-itself;
they are posited as not belonging to it
but rather as opposed to its in-itself,
as the finite.
Since each is in it and through its determination
the positing of its other, the two are inseparable.
But this unity rests hidden in their qualitative otherness;
it is their inner unity, one that lies only at their base.

The manner of the appearance of this unity has thereby been defined.
The unity is posited in existence as a turning over
or transition of the finite into the infinite, and vice-versa;
so that the infinite only emerges in the finite,
and the finite in the infinite,
the other in the other;
that is to say, each arises in the other
independently and immediately,
and their connection is only an external one.

The process of their transition
has the following, detailed shape.
We have the finite passing over into the infinite.
This passing over appears as an external doing.
In this emptiness beyond the finite, what arises?
What is there of positive in it?
On account of the inseparability of the infinite and the finite
(or because this infinite, which stands apart, is itself restricted),
the limit arises.
The infinite has vanished and the other,
the finite, has stepped in.
But this stepping in of the finite appears
as an event external to the infinite,
and the new limit as something that does not arise
out of the infinite itself but is likewise found given.
And with this we are back at the previous determination,
which has been sublated in vain.
This new limit, however, is itself only
something to be sublated or transcended.
And so there arises again the emptiness, the nothing,
in which we find again the said determination,
and so forth to infinity.

We have before us the alternating determination
of the finite and the infinite;
the finite is finite only with reference
to the ought or the infinite,
and the infinite is only infinite with reference to the finite.
The two are inseparable and at the same time
absolutely other with respect to each other;
each has in it the other of itself;
each is thus the unity of itself and its other,
and, in its determinateness not to be
what itself and what its other is:
it is existence.

This alternating determination of self-negating
and of negating the negating is what passes
as the progress to infinity,
which is accepted in so many shapes and applications
as an unsurpassable ultimate at which thought,
having reached this “and so on to infinity,”
has usually achieved its end.
This progress breaks out wherever relative determinations are
pressed to the point of opposition, so that,
though in inseparable unity,
each is nevertheless attributed an independent existence
over against the other.
This progress is therefore the contradiction
which is not resolved but is rather always
pronounced simply as present.

What we have before us is an abstract transcending
which remains incomplete because the transcending
itself has not been transcended.
Before us we have the infinite;
of course, this infinite is transcended,
for another limit is posited,
but just because of that only a return
is instead made back to the finite.
This bad infinite is in itself
the same as the perpetual ought;
it is indeed the negation of the finite,
but in truth it is unable to free itself from it;
the finite constantly resurfaces in it as its other,
since this infinite only is with reference to the finite,
which is its other.
The progress to infinity is
therefore only repetitious monotony,
the one and the same tedious
alternation of this finite and infinite.

The infinity of the infinite progress
remains burdened by the finite as such,
is thereby restricted, and is itself finite.
In fact, however, it is thereby posited as
the unity of the finite and the infinite.
Only, this unity is not reflected upon.
Yet it alone rouses the finite in the infinite,
and the infinite in the finite;
it is, so to speak, the impulse
driving the infinite progress.
This progress is the outside of this unity
at which representation remains fixated;
fixated at that perennial repetition
of one and the same alternation;
at the empty unrest of a progression
across the limit towards the infinite
which, in this infinity, finds a new limit
but is just as unable to halt at it
as it is at the infinite.
This infinite has the rigid determination
of a beyond that cannot be attained,
for the very reason that it ought not be attained,
since the determinateness of the beyond,
of an existent negation, has not been let go.
In this determination, the infinite has
the finite as a this-side over against it;
a finite that is likewise unable
to raise itself up to the infinite
just because it has this determination of an other,
that is, of an existence that perennially
regenerates itself in that beyond
precisely by being different from it.
