
CHAPTER 3

Ground

Essence determines itself as ground.

Just as nothing is at first
in simple immediate unity with being,
so here too the simple identity of essence is
at first in simple unity with its absolute negativity.
Essence is only this negativity which is pure reflection.
It is this pure reflection as
the turning back of being into itself;
hence it is determined, in itself or for us,
as the ground into which being resolves itself.
But this determinateness is not posited by the essence itself;
in other words, essence is not ground precisely because
it has not itself posited this determinateness that it possesses.
Its reflection, however, consists in positing itself as
what it is in itself, as a negative, and in determining itself.
The positive and the negative constitute the essential determination
in which essence is lost in its negation.
These self-subsisting determinations of reflection sublate themselves,
and the determination that has foundered to the ground is
the true determination of essence.

Consequently, ground is itself one of
the reflected determinations of essence,
but it is the last, or rather,
it is determination determined as sublated determination.
In foundering to the ground, the determination of reflection
receives its true meaning that it is the absolute
repelling of itself within itself;
or again, that the positedness that accrues to essence is
such only as sublated,
and conversely that only the self-sublating positedness is
the positedness of essence.
In determining itself as ground,
essence determines itself as the not-determined,
and only the sublating of its being determined is its determining.
Essence, in thus being determined as self-sublating,
does not proceed from an other but is,
in its negativity, identical with itself.

Since the advance to the ground is made starting
from determination as an immediate first
(is done by virtue of the nature of determination itself
that founders to the ground through itself),
the ground is at first determined by that immediate first.
But this determining is, on the one hand,
as the sublating of the determining,
the merely restored, purified or manifested identity of essence
which the determination of reflection is in itself;
on the other hand, this negating movement is, as determining,
the first positing of that reflective determinateness
that appeared as immediate determinateness,
but which is posited only by the self-excluding reflection of ground
and therein is posited as only something posited or sublated.
Thus essence, in determining itself as ground, proceeds only from itself.
As ground, therefore, it posits itself as essence,
and its determining consists in just this positing of itself as essence.
This positing is the reflection of essence
that sublates itself in its determining;
on that side is a positing, on this side is the positing of essence,
hence both in one act.

Reflection is pure mediation in general;
ground, the real mediation of essence with itself.
The former, the movement of nothing through nothing back to itself,
is the reflective shining of one in an other;
but, because in this reflection opposition does not
yet have any self-subsistence,
neither is the one, that which shines, something positive,
nor is the other in which it reflectively shines something negative.
Both are substrates, actually of the imagination;
they are still not self-referring.
Pure mediation is only pure reference,
without anything being referred to.
Determining reflection, for its part, does posit
such terms as are identical with themselves;
but these are at the same time only determined references.
Ground, on the contrary, is mediation that is real,
since it contains reflection as sublated reflection;
it is essence that turns back into itself
through its non-being and posits itself.
According to this moment of sublated reflection,
what is posited receives the determination of immediacy,
of an immediate which is self-identical
outside its reference or its reflective shining.
This immediacy is being as restored by essence,
the non-being of reflection through which essence mediates itself.
Essence returns into itself as it negates;
therefore, in its turning back into itself,
it gives itself the determinateness that precisely
for this reason is the self-identical negative,
is sublated positedness, and consequently,
as the self-identity of essence as ground,
equally an existent.

The ground is, first, absolute ground
one in which the essence is first of all
the general substrate for the ground-connection.
It then further determines itself as form and matter
and gives itself a content.

Second, it is determinate ground,
the ground of a determinate content.
Because the ground-connection, in being realized,
becomes as such external,
it passes over into conditioning mediation.

Third, ground presupposes a condition;
but the condition equally presupposes the ground;
the unconditioned is the unity of the two,
the fact itself that, by virtue of
the mediation of the conditioning reference,
passes over into concrete existence.
