B. THE IDEA OF THE GOOD

Inasmuch as the concept,
which is its own subject matter,
is determined in and for itself,
the subject is determined as singular.
As subjective it again has
an implicit otherness for its presupposition;
it is the impulse to realize itself,
the purpose that on its own wants togive itself
objectivity in the objective world
and realize itself.
In the theoretical idea the subjective concept,
as a universal that in and for itself lacks determination,
stands opposed to the objective world
from which it derives determinate content and filling.
But in the practical idea it is as actual
that it stands over against the actual;
but the certainty of itself that the subject possesses
in being determined in and for itself is
a certainty of its actuality
and of the non-actuality of the world;
it is the singularity of this world,
and the determinateness of its singularity,
not just its otherness as abstract universality,
which is a nullity for the subject.
The subject has here vindicated objectivity for itself;
its inner determinateness is the objective,
for it is the universality which is just
as much absolutely determined;
the previously objective world is on the
contrary only something still posited,
an immediate which is determined in
a multitude of ways but which,
because it is only immediately determined,
in itself eludes the unity of the concept
and is of itself a nullity.

This determinateness which is in the concept,
is equal to the concept,
and entails a demand for singular external actuality,
is the good.
It comes on the scene with the dignity of being absolute,
because it is intrinsically the totality of the concept,
the objective which is at the same time
in the form of free unity and subjectivity.
This idea is superior to the idea of cognition just considered,
for it has not only the value of the universal
but also of the absolutely actual.
It is impulse, in so far as this actual is still subjective,
self-positing, without at the same time
the form of immediate presupposition;
its impulse to realize itself is not, strictly speaking,
to give itself objectivity,
for this it possesses within itself,
but to give itself only this
empty form of immediacy.
The activity of purpose, therefore, is
not directed at itself,
is not a matter of letting in a given determination
and making it its own,
but of positing rather its own determination
and, by means of sublating
the determinations of the external world,
giving itself reality in the form of external actuality.
The idea of the will as a self-determining
explicitly possesses content within itself.
Now this content is indeed a determinate content,
and to this extent finite and restricted;
self-determination is essentially particularization,
since the reflection of the will is in itself,
as negative unity as such,
also singularity in the sense that
it excludes an other while presupposing it.
Yet the particularity of the content is
at first infinite by virtue of the form of the concept,
of which it is the proper determinateness,
and which in that content
possesses its negative self-identity,
and consequently not only a particularity
but its infinite singularity.
The mentioned finitude of the content
in the practical idea only means, therefore,
that the idea is at first not yet realized;
the concept is for the content
that which exists in and for itself;
it is here the idea in the form of
objectivity existing for itself;
on the one hand, the subjective is
for this reason no longer just something posited,
arbitrary or accidental,
but is an absolute;
but, on the other hand,
this form of concrete existence,
this being-for-itself,
does not as yet have the form of
the being-in-itself.
Thus what from the side of
the form as such appears as opposition,
appears in the form of the concept
reflected into simple identity, that is,
appears in the content as its simple determinateness;
the good, although valid in and for itself,
is thereby a certain particular purpose,
but not one that first receives its truth by being realized;
on the contrary, it is for itself already the true.

The syllogism of immediate realization
does not itself require closer exposition here;
it is none other than the previously considered syllogism
of external purposiveness;
only the content constitutes the difference.
In external as in formal purposiveness
it was an indeterminate finite content in general;
here, though also finite,
it is as such at the same time absolutely valid.
But in regard to the conclusion, the realized purpose,
a further difference enters in.
In being realized the finite purpose
still attains only the status of a means;
since it is not a purpose
determined in and for itself
already from the beginning,
as realized it also remains
something that does not
exist in and for itself.
If the good is again also
fixed as something finite,
and is essentially such, then,
notwithstanding its inner infinity,
it too cannot escape the fate of finitude
a fate that manifests itself in several forms.
The realized good is good by virtue of
what it already is in the subjective purpose, in its idea;
the realization gives it an external existence,
but since this existence has only the status of
an externality which is in and for itself null,
what is good in it has attained only
an accidental, fragile existence,
not a realization corresponding to the idea.
Further, since this good is restricted in content,
there are several kinds of it;
in concrete existence a good is subject to destruction
not only due to external contingency and to evil,
but also because of collision and conflict in the good itself.
From the side of the objective world presupposed for it
(in the presupposition of which consists
the subjectivity and the finitude of the good,
and which as a distinct world runs its own course),
the realization itself of the good
is exposed to obstacles, indeed,
might even be made impossible.
The good thus remains an ought;
it exists in and for itself,
but being, as the ultimate abstract immediacy,
remains over against it also determined as a non-being.
The idea of the fulfilled good is
indeed an absolute postulate,
but no more than a postulate, that is,
the absolute encumbered with
the determinateness of subjectivity.
There still are two worlds in opposition,
one a realm of subjectivity in
the pure spaces of transparent thought,
the other a realm of objectivity in
the element of an externally manifold actuality,
an impervious realm of darkness.
The complete development of this unresolved contradiction,
between that absolute purpose
and the restriction of this reality
that stands opposed to it,
has been examined in detail in
the Phenomenology of Spirit (pp. 323ff.).
Inasmuch as the idea has within it
the moment of complete determinateness,
the other concept to which the concept in
it relates possesses in its subjectivity
at the same time the moment of an object;
consequently the idea enters here into
the shape of self-consciousness,
and in this one respect
coincides with its exposition.

But what the practical idea still lacks is
the moment of real consciousness itself,
namely that the moment of actuality in the concept
would have attained for itself
the determination of external being.
This lack can also be regarded in this way,
namely that the practical idea still lacks the moment
of the theoretical idea.
That is to say, in the latter there stands
on the side of the subjective concept
the concept that is in process of being intuited
in itself by the concept
only the determination of universality;
cognition only knows itself as apprehension,
as the identity of the concept with itself
which, for itself, is indeterminate;
the filling, that is, the objectivity
determined in and for itself,
is for this identity a given;
what truly exists is for it
the actuality present there independently
of any subjective positing.
For the practical idea, on the contrary,
this actuality constantly confronting it as
an insuperable restriction is in and for itself a nullity
that ought to receive its true determination and intrinsic value
only through the purposes of the good.
It is the will, therefore, that alone stands
in the way of attaining its goal,
because it separates itself from cognition
and because for it external actuality does not
receive the form of a true existence.
The idea of the good can therefore find its completion
only in the idea of the true.

But it makes this transition through itself.
In the syllogism of action,
one premise is the immediate reference of
the good purpose to the actuality which it appropriates
and which, in the second premise, it directs as
external means against the external actuality.
The good is for the subjective concept the objective;
actuality confronts it in existence
as an insuperable restriction
only in so far as it still has
the determination of immediate existence,
not of something objective in the sense
that it is being in and for itself;
it is rather either the evil or the indifferent,
the merely determinable,
whose worth does not lie within it.
But this abstract being that confronts the good
in the second premise has already been sublated
by the practical idea itself;
the first premise of this idea's action is
the immediate objectivity of the concept,
according to which purpose is communicated to
actuality without any resistance
and is in the simple connection of identity with it.
To this extent, therefore, what remains is to bring together
the thoughts of the two premises of the practical idea.
All that is added to what is already accomplished
in the first premise by the objective concept is
that in the second it is posited by way of mediation, hence for it.
Just as in purposive connection in general,
where the realized purpose is again only a means
but the means is conversely also the realized purpose,
so too now in the syllogism of the good
the second premise is already
immediately present in the first in itself,
except that this immediacy is not sufficient
and the second premise is for the first already postulated
the realization of the good in
the face of another actuality confronting it is
the mediation which is essentially necessary
for the immediate connection and consummation of the good.
For the first premise is only the first negation
or the otherness of the concept,
an objectivity that would be a state of immersion of
the concept into externality;
the second premise is the sublation of this otherness,
whereby the immediate realization of the purpose
first becomes the actuality of the good as
concept existing for itself,
for in that actuality the concept is
posited as identical with itself,
not with an other,
and in this way alone as free concept.
If it is now claimed that the purpose of the good is
thereby still not realized,
what we have is a relapse of the concept to
the standpoint that it assumes prior to its activity,
when the actual is determined as worthless
and yet presupposed as real.
This is a relapse that gives rise to
the progression to bad infinity.
Its sole ground is that in the sublating of that abstract reality
the sublating itself is just as immediately forgotten,
or what is forgotten is that this reality is
rather already presupposed as an actuality
which is in and for itself worthless, nothing objective.
This repetition of the presupposition of
the unrealized purpose after
the actual realization of the purpose
also means that the subjective attitude of
the objective concept is reproduced and perpetuated,
with the result that the finitude of the good,
with respect to both content and form,
appears as the abiding truth,
and its actualization always as
only a singular, never universal, act.
As a matter of fact this state has
already sublated itself
in the realization of the good;
what still limits the objective concept is
its own view of itself,
and this view vanishes in the reflection
on what its realization is in itself.
By this view the concept only stands in its own way,
and all that it has to do about it is to turn,
not against an external actuality, but against itself.

That is to say, the activity in the second premise
produces only a one-sided being-for-itself,
and its product therefore appears as
something subjective and singular,
and the first presupposition is
consequently repeated in it.
But this activity is in truth just as much
the positing of the implicit identity
of the objective concept and the immediate actuality.
This actuality is by presupposition determined
to have only the reality of an appearance,
to be in and for itself a nullity,
entirely open to determination by the objective concept.
As the external actuality is altered by
the activity of the objective concept
and its determination is consequently sublated,
the merely apparent reality,
the external determinability and worthlessness,
are by that very fact removed from it
and it is thereby posited as having existence
in and for itself.
In this the presupposition itself is sublated,
namely the determination of the good as
a merely subjective purpose restricted in content,
the necessity of first realizing it
by subjective activity,
and this activity itself.
In the result the mediation itself sublates itself;
the result is an immediacy which is not
the restoration of the presupposition,
but is rather the presupposition as sublated.
The idea of the concept that is determined in
and for itself is thereby posited,
no longer just in the active subject but
equally as an immediate actuality;
and conversely, this actuality is posited
as it is in cognition,
as an objectivity that truly exists.
The singularity of the subject with which
the subject was burdened by its presupposition
has vanished together with the presupposition.
Thus the subject now exists
as free, universal self-identity
for which the objectivity of the concept is
a given, just as immediately present to the subject
as the subject immediately knows itself to be
the concept determined in and for itself.
Accordingly, in this result cognition is
restored and united with the practical idea;
the previously discovered reality is
at the same time determined as
the realized absolute purpose,
no longer an object of investigation,
a merely objective world without
the subjectivity of the concept,
but as an objective world whose inner ground
and actual subsistence is rather the concept.
This is the absolute idea.
