A. THE EXPOSITION OF THE ABSOLUTE

The absolute is not just being, nor even essence.
The former is the first unreflected immediacy;
the latter, the reflected immediacy;
further, each is explicitly a totality,
but a determinate totality.
Being emerges in essence as concrete existence,
and the connection of being and essence develops
into the relation of inner and outer.
The inner is essence, but as a totality
whose essential determination is
to be referred to being and to be being immediately.
The outer is being, but with the essential determination of
being immediately connected with reflection
and, equally, in a relationless identity with essence.
The absolute itself is the absolute unity of the two;
it is that which constitutes in general
the ground of the essential relation
which, as only relation, has yet
to return into this its identity
and whose ground is not yet posited.

It follows that the determination of
the absolute is to be absolute form,
but at the same time not as an identity
whose moments only are simple determinacies,
but, on the contrary, as an identity
whose moments are each explicitly the totality
and hence, indifferent with respect to the form,
the complete content of the whole.
But, conversely, the absolute is absolute content
in such a way that this content,
which is as such indifferent plurality,
explicitly has the negative connection of form
by virtue of which its manifold is
only one substantial identity.

Thus the identity of the absolute is
for this reason absolute identity,
because each of its parts is itself the whole
or each determinateness is the totality, that is,
because determinateness has become as such
a thoroughly transparent reflective shine,
a difference that has disappeared in its positedness.
Essence, concrete existence, the world existing in itself,
whole, parts, force:
these reflected determinations appear to representation
as true being valid in and for itself;
but against them the absolute is the ground
into which they have foundered.
Because in the absolute the form is
now only simple self-identity,
the absolute does not determine itself,
for the determination is a difference of form
which is valid as such from the start.
But because the absolute at the same time contains
every difference and form determination in general,
or because it is itself absolute form and reflection,
the difference of content must also come into it.
But the absolute itself is the absolute identity;
to be this identity is its determination,
for the manifoldness of the world-in-itself
and of the phenomenal world has all been sublated in it.
In the absolute itself there is no becoming,
since the absolute is not being;
nor does the absolute determine itself reflectively,
for it is not the essence which determines itself only inwardly;
and it also does not externalize itself,
for it is the identity of inner and outer.
But in this way the movement of reflection
stands over against its absolute identity.
The movement is sublated in this identity
and is thus only its inner;
but consequently its outer.

At first, therefore, the movement consists only
in sublating its act in the absolute.
It is the beyond of the manifold differences
and determinations and of their movement,
a beyond that lies at the back of the absolute.
It is thus the negative exposition of the absolute
earlier alluded to.
In its true presentation, this exposition is
the preceding whole of the logical movement
of the spheres of being and essence,
the content of which has not been gathered in
from outside as something given and contingent;
nor has it been sunk into the abyss of the absolute
by a reflection external to it;
on the contrary, it has determined itself within it
by virtue of its inner necessity,
and, as being's own becoming
and as the reflection of essence,
has returned into the absolute
as into its ground.

But this exposition has itself also a positive side,
for in foundering to the ground the finite demonstrates
that its nature is to be referred to the absolute,
or to contain the absolute within.
However, this side is not as much
the positive exposition of the absolute
as it is rather the exposition of the determinations,
namely that these have the absolute for their abyss,
but also for their ground,
or that that which imparts subsistence to them,
to their reflective shine, is the absolute itself.
Being as shine is not nothing but reflection,
reference to the absolute;
or it is a shine inasmuch as
that which shines in it is the absolute.
This positive exposition thus halts the finite
just before its disappearing:
it considers it an expression and
a copy of the absolute.
But this transparency of the finite
that lets only the absolute transpire through it
ends up in complete disappearance,
for there is nothing in the finite
which would retain for it a difference
over against the absolute;
as a medium, it is absorbed by
that through which it shines.

This positive exposition of the absolute is
therefore itself only a reflective shine,
for the true positive, that which contains
the exposition and the expounded content,
is the absolute itself.
Whatever the further determinations that may occur,
the form in which the absolute reflectively shines is
a nullity which the exposition gathers up from outside
and in which it gains for itself
a starting point for its activity.
Any such determination has in the absolute,
not its beginning but its end.
This expository process, therefore,
though it is an absolute act
because of its reference to
the absolute into which it returns,
is not so at its starting point
which is a determination
external to the absolute.

But in actual fact
the exposition of the absolute
is the absolute's own doing,
an act that begins from itself
and arrives at itself.
The absolute, only as absolute identity,
is absolute in a determined guise,
that is, as identical absolute;
it is posited as such by reflection
over against opposition and manifoldness;
or it is only the negative of
reflection and determination in general.
It is not just the exposition of the absolute
which is therefore something incomplete,
but this absolute itself
which is only arrived at.
Or again, the absolute
which is only as absolute identity
is only the absolute of an external reflection.
It is, therefore, not the absolutely absolute
but the absolute in a determination,
or it is attribute.

But the absolute is not attribute just because
it is the subject matter of an external reflection
and is consequently something determined by it.
Or, reflection is not only external to it;
but, precisely because it is external to it,
it is immediately internal to it.
The absolute is absolute only because
it is not abstract identity
but is the identity of being and essence,
or the identity of the inner and the outer.
It is therefore itself the absolute form
that makes it reflectively shine within itself
and determines it as attribute.

