
C. CONDITION

a. The relatively unconditioned

1. Ground is the immediate,
and the grounded the mediated.
But ground is positing reflection;
as such, it makes itself into positedness
and is presupposing reflection;
as such it refers itself to itself
as to something sublated,
to an immediate through which
it is itself mediated.
This mediation, as an advance
from the immediate to the ground,
is not an external reflection
but, as we have seen, the ground's own doing
or, what is the same, the ground-connection,
as reflection into its self-identity,
is just as essentially self-externalizing reflection.
The immediate to which ground refers as
to its essential presupposition is condition;
real ground is accordingly essentially conditioned.
The determinateness that it contains is
the otherness of itself.
Condition is therefore,
first, an immediate, manifold existence.
Second, it is this existence referred to an other,
to something which is ground,
not of this existence but in some other respect,
for existence itself is immediate and without ground.
According to this reference, it is something posited;
as condition, the immediate existence is supposed to be
not for itself but for another.
But this, that it thus is for another, is at the same time
itself only a positedness;
that it is posited is sublated in its immediacy:
an existence is indifferent to being a condition.
Third, condition is something immediate in the sense
that it constitutes the presupposition of ground.
In this determination, it is the form-connection of ground
withdrawn into self-identity, hence the content of ground.
But content is as such only the indifferent unity of ground,
as in the form: without form, no content.
It nevertheless frees itself
from this indifferent unity
in that the ground-connection,
in the complete ground,
becomes a connection external to its identity,
whereby content acquires immediacy.
In so far, therefore, as condition is
that in which the ground-connection has
its identity with itself,
it constitutes the content of ground;
but since this content is indifferent to form,
it is only implicitly the content of form,
is something which has yet to become content
and hence constitutes the material for the ground.
Posited as condition,
and in accordance with the second moment,
existence is determined to lose its indifferent immediacy
and to become the moment of another.
By virtue of its immediacy, it is indifferent to this connection;
inasmuch as it enters into it, however,
it constitutes the in-itself of the ground
and is for it the unconditioned.
In order to be condition,
it has its presupposition in the ground
and is itself conditioned;
but this condition is external to it.

2. Something is not through its condition;
its condition is not its ground.
Condition is for the ground
the moment of unconditioned immediacy,
but is not itself the movement and the positing
that refers itself to itself negatively
and that makes itself into a positedness.
Over against condition there stands,
therefore, the ground-connection.
Something has, besides its condition, also a ground.
This ground is the empty movement of reflection,
for the latter has the immediacy
which is its presupposition outside it.
But it is the whole form
and the self-subsistent process of mediation,
for the condition is not its ground.
Since this mediating refers itself to itself as positing,
it equally is according to this side
something immediate and unconditioned;
it does indeed presuppose itself,
but as an externalized or sublated positing;
whatever it is in accordance with its determination,
that it is, on the contrary, in and for itself.
Inasmuch as the ground-connection is
thus a self-subsisting self-reference
and has within it the identity of reflection,
it has a content which is peculiarly its own
as against the content of the condition.
The one content is that of the ground
and is therefore essentially informed;
the other content, that of the condition,
is on the contrary only an immediate material
whose connecting reference to the ground,
while at the same time constituting
the in-itself of the latter,
is also equally external to it;
it is thus a mingling of a self-subsisting content
that has no reference to the content of the ground determination
and of the content that enters into the latter
and, as its material,
should become a moment of it.

3. The two sides of the whole,
condition and ground,
are thus, on the one hand,
indifferent and unconditioned
with respect to each other:
the one as the non-referred-to side,
to which the connecting reference
in which it is the condition is external;
the other as the connecting reference, or form,
for which the determinate existence of
the condition is only a material,
something passive whose form,
such as it possesses on its own account,
is unessential.
On the other hand, the two sides are also mediated.
Condition is the in-itself of the ground;
so much is it the essential moment of the ground-connection,
that it is the simple self-identity of the ground.
But this also is sublated;
this in-itself is only something posited;
immediate existence is indifferent to being a condition.
The fact, therefore, that condition is the in-itself
of the ground constitutes the side of it
by which it is a mediated condition.
Likewise, the ground-connection has
in its self-subsistence also a presupposition;
it has its in-itself outside itself.
Consequently, each of the two sides is this contradiction,
that they are indifferent immediacy and essential mediation,
both in one reference
or the contradiction of independent subsistence
and of being determined as only moments.

b. The absolutely unconditioned

At first, each of the two relatively unconditioned sides
reflectively shines in the other;
condition, as an immediate, is reflected
in the form connection of the ground,
and this form in the immediate existence as its positedness;
but each, apart from this reflective shine of its other in it,
stands out on its own and has a content of its own.

Condition is at first immediate existence;
its form has these two moments:
that of positedness, according to which it is, as condition,
material and moment of the ground;
and that of the in-itself, according to which
it constitutes the essentiality of ground
or its simple reflection into itself.
Both sides of the form are external to immediate existence,
for the latter is the sublated ground-connection.

But, first, existence is in it only this:
to sublate itself in its immediacy
and to founder, going to the ground.
Being is as such only the becoming of essence;
it is its essential nature to
make itself into a positedness
and into an identity which is
an immediacy through the negation of itself.
The form determinations of positedness
and of self-identical in-itself,
the form through which immediate existence is condition,
are not, therefore, external to that existence;
the latter is, rather, this very reflection.

Second, as condition, being is now posited as
that which it essentially is,
namely as a moment and consequently as the being of an other,
and at the same time as the in-itself of an other;
it is in itself but only through the negation of itself,
namely through the ground and through its self-sublating
and consequent presupposing reflection;
the in-itself of being is thus only something posited.
This in-itself of the condition has two sides:
one side is its essentiality as essentiality of the ground,
while the other is the immediacy of its existence.
Or rather, both sides are the same thing.
Existence is an immediate, but immediacy
is essentially something mediated,
namely through the self-sublating ground.
Existence, as this immediacy mediated by a self-sublating mediating,
is at the same time the in-itself of the ground and its unconditioned side;
but again, this in-itself is at the same time itself
equally only moment or positedness, since it is mediated.
Condition is, therefore, the whole form of the ground-connection;
it is the presupposed in-itself of the latter,
but, consequently, is itself a positedness
and its immediacy is this, to make itself into a positedness
and thereby to repel itself from itself,
in such as way that it both founders to the ground and is ground,
the ground that makes itself into a positedness
and thereby into a grounded, and both are one and the same.

Likewise in the conditioned ground, the in-itself is not
just as the reflective shining of an other in it.
This ground is the self-subsistent,
that is, self-referring reflection of the positing,
and consequently the self-identical;
or it is in it its in-itself and its content.
But it is at the same time presupposing reflection;
it negatively refers to itself
and posits its in-itself as an other opposite to it,
and condition, according to both its moment of in-itself
and of immediate existence, is
the ground-connection's own moment;
the immediate existence essentially is only through its ground
and is a moment of itself as a presupposing.
This ground, therefore, is equally the whole itself.

What we have here, therefore, is only one whole of form,
but equally so only one whole of content.
For the proper content of condition is essential content
only in so far as it is the self-identity of reflection in the form,
or the ground-connection is in it this immediate existence.
Further, this existence is condition only through
the presupposing reflection of the ground;
it is the ground's self-identity, or its content,
to which the ground posits itself as opposite.
Therefore, the existence is not a merely
formless material for the ground-connection;
on the contrary, because it has this form in it, it is informed matter,
and because in its identity with it it is at the same time
indifferent to it, it is content.
Finally, it is the same content as that possessed by the ground,
for it is precisely content as that which is self-identical
in the form connection.

The two sides of the whole,
condition and ground,
are therefore one essential unity,
as content as well as form.
They pass into one another,
or, since they are reflections,
they posit themselves as sublated,
refer themselves to this their negation,
and reciprocally presuppose each other.
But this is at the same time only one reflection of the two,
and their presupposing is, therefore, one presupposing only;
the reciprocity of this presupposing ultimately amounts to this,
that they both presuppose one identity
for their subsistence and their substrate.
This substrate, the one content and unity of form of both,
is the truly unconditioned; the fact in itself.
Condition is, as it was shown above, only the relatively unconditioned.
It is usual, therefore, to consider it as itself something conditioned
and to ask for a new condition,
whereby the customary progression ad infinitum
from condition to condition is set in motion.
But now, why is it that at one condition
a new condition is asked for, that is,
why is that condition assumed to be something conditioned?
Because it is some finite determinate existence or other.
But this is a further determination of condition
that does not enter into its concept.
Condition is as such conditioned solely because
it is the posited in-itselfness;
it is, therefore, sublated in the absolutely unconditioned.

Now this contains within itself the two sides,
condition and ground, as its moments;
it is the unity to which they have returned.
Together, the two constitute its form or its positedness.
The unconditioned fact is the condition of both,
but the condition which is absolute, that is to say,
one which is itself ground.
As ground, the fact is now the negative identity
that has repelled itself into those two moments:
first, in the shape of the sublated ground-connection,
the shape of an immediate manifold void of
unity and external to itself,
one that refers to the ground as an other to it
and at the same time constitutes its in-itself;
second, in the shape of an inner, simple form which is ground,
but which refers to the self-identical
immediate as to an other, determining it as condition,
that is, determining the in-itself of it as its own moment.
These two sides presuppose the totality,
presuppose that it is that which posits them.
Contrariwise, because they presuppose the totality,
the latter seems to be in turn also conditioned by them,
and the fact to spring forth from its condition and its ground.
But since these two sides have shown themselves to be an identity,
the relation of condition and ground has disappeared;
the two are reduced to a mere reflective shine;
the absolutely unconditioned is in its movement of positing
and presupposing only the movement in which this shine sublates itself.
It is the fact's own doing that it conditions itself
and places itself as ground over against its conditions;
but in connecting conditions and ground,
the fact is a reflection shining in itself;
its relation to them is a rejoining itself.

c. Procession of the fact into concrete existence

The absolutely unconditioned is the absolute ground
that is identical with its condition,
the immediate fact as the truly essential.
As ground, it refers negatively to itself
and makes itself into a positedness;
but this positedness is a reflection
that is complete in both its sides
and is in them the self-identical form of connection,
as has transpired from its concept.
This positedness is therefore first the sublated ground,
the fact as an immediacy void of reflection,
the side of the conditions.
This is the totality of the determinations of the fact,
the fact itself, but the fact as thrown into
the externality of being, the restored circle of being.
In condition, essence lets go of the unity of its immanent reflection;
but it lets it go as an immediacy that now carries
the character of being a conditioning presupposition
and of essentially constituting only one of its sides.
For this reason the conditions are the whole content of the fact,
because they are the unconditioned in the form of formless being.
But because of this form, they also have yet another shape besides
the conditions of the content as this is in the fact as such.
They appear as a manifold without unity,
mingled with extra-essential elements
and other circumstances that do not belong
to the circle of existence as constituting
the conditions of this determinate fact.
For the absolute, unrestricted fact,
the sphere of being itself is the condition.
The ground, returning into itself, posits
that sphere as the first immediacy
to which it refers as to its unconditioned.
This immediacy, as sublated reflection,
is reflection in the element of being,
which thus forms itself as such into a whole;
form proliferates as determinateness of being
and thus appears as a manifold distinct from
the determination of reflection
and as a content indifferent to it.
The unessential, which is in the sphere of being
but which the latter sheds in so far as it is condition,
is the determinateness of the immediacy into which
the unity of form has sunk.
This unity of form, as the connection of being,
is in the latter at first as becoming the passing over
of a determinateness of being into another.
But the becoming of being is also the coming to be
of essence and a return to the ground.
The existence that constitutes the conditions, therefore,
is in truth not determined as condition by an other
and is not used by it as material;
on the contrary, it itself makes itself, through itself,
into the moment of an other.
Further, the becoming of this existence
does not start off from itself
as if it were truly the first and immediate;
on the contrary, its immediacy is
something only presupposed, and the movement of
its becoming is the doing of reflection itself.
The truth of existence is thus that it is condition;
its immediacy is solely by virtue of
the reflection of the ground-connection
that posits itself as sublated.
Consequently, like immediacy, becoming is only
the reflective shine of the unconditioned
inasmuch as this presupposes itself
and has its form in this presupposing,
and hence the immediacy of being is essentially
only a moment of the form.

The other side of this reflective shining of
the unconditioned is the ground-connection as such,
determined as form as against the immediacy
of the conditions and the content.
But this side is the form of the absolute fact
that possesses the unity of its form with itself
or its content within it,
and, in determining this content as condition,
in this very positing sublates the diversity of the content
and reduces it to a moment;
just as, contrariwise, as a form void of essence,
in this self-identity it gives itself
the immediacy of subsistence.
The reflection of the ground
sublates the immediacy of the conditions,
connecting them and making them
moments within the unity of the fact;
but the conditions are that which
the unconditioned fact itself presupposes
and the latter, therefore, sublates its own positing;
consequently, its positing converts itself
just as immediately into a becoming.
The two, therefore, are one unity;
the internal movement of the conditions is a becoming,
the return into the ground and the positing of the ground;
but the ground as posited, and this means as sublated, is the immediate.
The ground refers negatively to itself,
makes itself into a positedness and grounds the conditions;
in this, however, in that the immediate existence is
thus determined as a positedness,
the ground sublates it and only then makes itself into a ground.
This reflection is therefore the self-mediation of
the unconditioned fact through its negation.
Or rather, the reflection of the unconditioned is
at first a presupposing,
but this sublating of itself is
immediately a positing which determines;
secondly, in this positing the reflection is
immediately the sublating of the presupposed
and a determining from within itself;
this determining is thus in turn the sublating of the positing:
it is a becoming within itself.
In this, the mediation as a turning back
to itself through negation has disappeared;
mediation is simple reflection
reflectively shining within itself
and groundless, absolute becoming.
The fact's movement of being posited,
on the one hand through its conditions,
and on the other hand through its ground,
now is the disappearing of
the reflective shine of mediation.
The process by which the fact is posited
is accordingly a coming forth,
the simple self-staging of
the fact in concrete existence,
the pure movement of the fact to itself.

When all the conditions of a fact are at hand,
the fact steps into concrete existence.
The fact is, before it exists concretely;
it is, first, as essence or as unconditioned;
second, it has immediate existence or is determined,
and this in the twofold manner just considered,
on the one hand in its conditions
and on the other in its ground.
In the former case, it has given itself the form
of the external, groundless being,
for as absolute reflection the fact is
negative self-reference
and makes itself into its presupposition.
This presupposed unconditioned is,
therefore, the groundless immediate
whose being is just to be there, without grounds.
If, therefore, all the conditions of the fact are at hand,
that is, if the totality of the fact is
posited as a groundless immediate,
then this scattered manifold
internally recollects itself.
The whole fact must be there,
within its conditions,
or all the conditions belong
to its concrete existence;
for the all of them constitutes
the reflection of the fact.
Or again, immediate existence,
since it is condition,
is determined by form;
its determinations are therefore determinations of reflection
and with the positing of one the rest also are essentially posited.
The recollecting of the conditions is at first
the foundering to the ground of immediate existence
and the coming to be of the ground.
But the ground is thereby a posited ground, that is,
to the extent that it is ground,
to that extent it is sublated as ground
and is immediate being.
If, therefore, all the conditions of the fact are at hand,
they sublate themselves as immediate existence and as presupposition,
and the ground is equally sublated.
The latter proves to be only a reflective shine
that immediately disappears;
this coming forth is thus the tautological movement
of the fact to itself:
its mediation through the conditions and through the ground
is the disappearing of both of these.
The coming forth into concrete existence is therefore so immediate,
that it is mediated only by the disappearing of the mediation.

The fact proceeds from the ground.
It is not grounded or posited by it
in such a manner that the ground
would still stay underneath, as a substrate;
on the contrary, the positing is
the outward movement of ground to itself
and the simple disappearing of it.
Through its union with the conditions,
it obtains the external immediacy
and the moment of being.
But it does not obtain them
as a something external,
nor by referring to them externally;
rather, as ground it makes
itself into a positedness;
its simple essentiality rejoins
itself in the positedness
and, in this sublating of itself,
it is the disappearing of
its difference from its positedness,
and is thus simple essential immediacy.
It does not, therefore, linger on
as something distinct from the grounded;
on the contrary, the truth of the grounding is
that in grounding the ground unites with itself,
and its reflection into another is
consequently its reflection into itself.
The fact is thus the unconditioned
and, as such, equally so the groundless;
it arises from the ground only in so far as
the latter has foundered and is no longer ground:
it rises up from the groundless, that is,
from its own essential negativity or pure form.

This immediacy, mediated by ground and condition
and self-identical through the sublating of mediation,
is concrete existence.
