B. RELATIVE NECESSITY OR REAL ACTUALITY, POSSIBILITY, AND NECESSITY

1. The necessity which has resulted is formal
because its moments are formal,
that is, simple determinations which are a totality
only as an immediate unity,
or as an immediate conversion of the one into the other,
and thus lack the shape of self-subsistence.
The unity in this formal necessity is therefore simple at first,
and indifferent to its differences.
As the immediate unity of the form determinations,
this necessity is actuality,
but an actuality which, since its unity is now determined as indifferent
to the difference of the form determinations, has a content.
This content as an indifferent identity contains the form
also as indifferent that is, as a mere variety of determinations,
and is a manifold content in general.
This actuality is real actuality.

Real actuality is as such at first
the thing of many properties,
the concretely existing world;
but it is not the concrete existence
that dissolves into appearance
but, as actuality, it is at the same time
an in-itself and immanent reflection;
it preserves itself in the manifoldness of mere concrete existence;
its externality is an inner relating only to itself.
What is actual can act;
something announces its actuality by what it produces.
Its relating to an other is the manifestation of itself,
and this manifestation is
neither a transition
(the immediate something refers to the other in this way)
nor an appearing
(in this way the thing only is in relation to an other);
it is a self-subsistent which has its immanent reflection,
its determinate essentiality, in another self-subsistent.

Now real actuality likewise has possibility immediately present in it.
It contains the moment of the in-itself;
but, since it is in the first instance only immediate unity,
it is in one of the determinations of form
and hence distinguished, as immediate existent,
from the in-itself or possibility.

2. This possibility, as the in-itself of real actuality,
is itself real possibility, at first the in-itself full of content.
Formal possibility is immanent reflection only as abstract identity,
the absence of contradiction in a something.
But when we delve into the determinations,
the circumstances, the conditions of a fact
in order to discover its possibility,
we do not stop at this formal possibility
but consider its real possibility.

This real possibility is itself immediate concrete existence,
but no longer because possibility as such, as a formal moment,
is immediately its opposite, a non-reflected actuality,
but because this determination pertains to it
by the very fact of being real possibility.
The real possibility of a fact is therefore
the immediately existent manifoldness of
circumstances that refer to it.

This manifoldness of existence is therefore indeed
both possibility and actuality,
but their identity is at first only the content
which is indifferent to these form determinations;
they therefore constitute the form,
determined as against their identity.
Or the immediate real actuality, because it is immediate,
is determined as against its possibility;
as this determinate and hence reflected actuality,
it is real possibility.
This real possibility is now indeed the posited whole of the form,
but of the form in the determinateness of actuality as formal
or immediate and equally of possibility as the abstract in-itself.
This actuality, therefore, which constitutes the possibility of a fact,
is not its own possibility but the in-itself of an other actual;
itself, it is the actuality that ought to be sublated,
the possibility as only possibility.
Real possibility thus constitutes the totality of conditions,
a dispersed actuality which is not reflected into itself
but is determined to be the in-itself of an other
and intended in this determination to return to itself.

What is really possible is, therefore,
something formally identical according to its in-itself,
free of contradiction because of its simple content determination;
but, as self-identical, this something must also not contradict
itself according to its developed and differentiated circumstances
and all else connected with it.
But, secondly, because it is manifold in itself
and in manifold connection with others,
and variety inherently passes over into opposition,
it is contradictory.
Whenever a possibility is in question,
and the issue is to demonstrate its contradiction,
one need only fasten on to the multiplicity that it contains as content
or as its conditioned concrete existence,
and from this the contradiction will easily be discovered.
And this contradiction is not just a function of comparing;
on the contrary, the manifold of concrete existence is in itself this,
to sublate itself and to founder to the ground:
in this it explicitly has the determination of
being only a possibility.
Whenever all the conditions of a fact are completely present,
the fact is actually there;
the completeness of the conditions is
the totality as in the content,
and the fact is itself this content determined
as being equally actual as possible.
In the sphere of the conditioned ground,
the conditions have the form
(that is, the ground or the reflection that stands on its own)
outside them,
and it is this form that makes them moments
of the fact and elicits concrete existence in them.
Here, on the contrary, the immediate actuality is
not determined to be condition by virtue of
a presupposing reflection,
but the supposition is rather that the immediate actuality is
itself the possibility.

In self-sublating real possibility,
it is a twofold that is now sublated;
for this possibility is itself
the twofold of actuality and possibility.
(1) The actuality is formal, or is a concrete existence
which appeared to subsist immediately,
and through its sublating becomes reflected being,
the moment of an other,
and thus comes in possession of the in-itself.
(2) That concrete existence was also determined
as possibility or as the in-itself, but of an other.
As it sublates itself, this in-itself of the other is
also sublated and passes over into actuality.
This movement of self-sublating real possibility
thus produces the same moments that are already present,
but each as it comes to be out of the other;
in this negation, therefore, the possibility
is also not a transition but a self-rejoining.
In formal possibility, if something was possible,
then an other than it, not itself, was also possible.
Real possibility no longer has such an other over against it,
for it is real in so far as it is itself also actuality.
Therefore, as its immediate concrete existence,
the circle of conditions, sublates itself,
it makes itself into the in-itselfness which it already is,
namely the in-itself of an other.
And conversely, since its moment of in-itselfness
thereby sublates itself at the same time,
it becomes actuality, hence the moment
which it likewise already is.
What disappears is consequently this,
that actuality was determined as the possibility
or the in-itself of an other,
and, conversely, the possibility as an actuality
which is not that of which it is the possibility.

3. The negation of real possibility is thus its self-identity;
inasmuch as in its sublating it is thus within itself
the recoiling of this sublating, it is real necessity.

What is necessary cannot be otherwise;
but what is only possible can be,
for possibility is the in-itself
which is only positedness
and hence essentially otherness.
Formal possibility is this identity
as transition into the other as such;
but real possibility, since it has
the other moment of actuality within it,
is already itself necessity.
Hence what is really possible can no longer be otherwise;
under the given conditions and circumstances,
nothing else can follow.
Real possibility and necessity are, therefore,
only apparently distinguished;
theirs is an identity that does not first come to be
but is already presupposed at their base.
Real possibility is therefore a connection full of content,
for the content is that identity, existing in itself,
which is indifferent to form.

But this necessity is at the same time relative.
For it has a presupposition from which it begins;
it takes its start from the contingent.
For the real actual is as such the determinate actual,
and first has its determinateness as immediate being
in that it is a multiplicity of concretely existing circumstances;
but this immediate being as determinateness is also the negative of
itself, is an in-itself or possibility and so real possibility.
As this unity of the two moments, it is the totality of form,
but a totality which is still external to itself;
it is the unity of possibility and actuality in such a way that
(1) the manifold concrete existence is possibility immediately or positively:
it is a possible, something self-identical as such, because it is an actual;
(2) inasmuch as this possibility of concrete existence is posited,
it is determined as only possibility,
as the immediate conversion of actuality into its opposite, or as contingency.
Hence this possibility which immediate actuality has within
in so far as it is condition, is only the in-itself
or the possibility of an other.
Because this in-itself, as shown, sublates itself and this positedness
is itself posited, real possibility becomes indeed necessity;
but this necessity thus begins from that unity of the possible and the actual
which is not yet reflected into itself;
this presupposing and the movement which turns back
unto itself are still separate;
or necessity has not yet determined itself
out of itself into contingency.

The relativity of real possibility is manifested in the content
by the fact that the latter is at first only
the identity indifferent to form,
is therefore distinct from it
and a determinate content in general.
A necessary reality is for this reason any limited actuality
which, because of its limitation, is in some other respect
also only something contingent.

In actual fact, therefore, real necessity is
in itself also contingency.
This first becomes apparent because real necessity,
although something necessary according to form,
is still something limited according to content,
and derives its contingency through the latter.
But this contingency is to be found also
in the form of real necessity because, as shown,
real possibility is the necessary only in itself,
but as posited it is the mutual otherness of
actuality and possibility.
Real necessity thus contains contingency;
it is the turning back into itself from the restless
being-the-other-of-each-other of actuality and possibility,
but not the turning back from itself to itself.
In itself, therefore, we have here the unity
of necessity and contingency;
this unity is to be called absolute actuality.

