
B. DIFFERENCE

1. Absolute difference

Difference is the negativity that
reflection possesses in itself,
the nothing which is said in identity discourse,
the essential moment of identity itself
which, as the negativity of itself,
at the same time determines itself
and is differentiated from difference.

1. This difference is difference in and for itself,
absolute difference, the difference of essence.
It is difference in and for itself,
not difference through something external
but self-referring, hence simple, difference.
It is essential that we grasp absolute difference as simple.
In the absolute difference of A and not-A from each other,
it is the simple “not” which, as such,
constitutes the difference.
Difference itself is a simple concept.
“In this,” so it is said, “two things differ, in that etc.”
“In this,” that is, in one and the same respect,
relative to the same basis of determination.
It is the difference of reflection,
not the otherness of existence.
One existence and another existence are
posited as lying outside each other;
each of the two existences thus
determined over against each other
has an immediate being for itself.
The other of essence, by contrast,
is the other in and for itself,
not the other of some other
which is to be found outside it;
it is simple determinateness in itself.
Also in the sphere of existence
did otherness and determinateness
prove to be of this nature,
simple determinateness, identical opposition;
but this identity showed itself only as
the transition of a determinateness into the other.
Here, in the sphere of reflection,
difference comes in as reflected,
so posited as it is in itself.

2. Difference in itself is the difference
that refers itself to itself;
thus it is the negativity of itself,
the difference not from another
but of itself from itself;
it is not itself but its other.
What is different from difference, however, is identity.
Difference is, therefore, itself and identity.
The two together constitute difference;
difference is the whole and its moment.
One can also say that difference,
as simple difference, is no difference;
it is such only with reference to identity;
even better, that as difference it entails
itself and this reference equally.
Difference is the whole and its own moment,
just as identity equally is its whole and its moment.
This is to be regarded as
the essential nature of reflection
and as the determined primordial origin
of all activity and self-movement.
Both difference and identity make themselves
into moment or positedness
because, as reflection, they are negative self-reference.
Difference, thus as unity of itself and of identity,
is internally determined difference.
It is not the transition into another,
not reference to another outside it;
it has its other, identity, within,
and in like manner identity,
in being included in the determination of difference,
has not lost itself in it as its other
but retains itself therein is
the reflection-into-itself of difference, its moment.

3. Difference has both these moments,
identity and difference;
thus the two are both a positedness, determinateness.
But in this positedness each refers to itself.
The one, identity, is itself immediately
the moment of immanent reflection;
but no less is the other, difference,
difference in itself, reflected difference.
Difference, inasmuch as it has two such moments
which are themselves reflections into themselves,
is diversity.

2. Diversity

1. Identity internally breaks apart into diversity
because, as absolute difference in itself,
it posits itself as the negative of itself
and these, its two moments
(itself and the negative of itself),
are reflections into themselves,
are identical with themselves;
or precisely because it itself
immediately sublates its negating
and is in its determination reflected into itself.
The different subsists as diverse,
indifferent to any other,
because it is identical with itself,
because identity constitutes its base and element;
or, the diverse remains what it is
even in its opposite, identity.

Diversity constitutes the otherness
as such of reflection.
The other of existence has immediate being,
where negativity resides, for its foundation.
But in reflection it is self-identity,
the reflected immediacy, that constitutes
the subsistence of the negative and its indifference.

The moments of difference are identity and difference itself.
These moments are diverse when reflected into themselves,
referring themselves to themselves;
thus, in the determination of identity,
they are only self-referring;
identity is not referred to difference,
nor is difference referred to identity;
hence, inasmuch as each of these moments is
referred only to itself, the two
are not determined
with respect to each other.
Now because in this way the two are not differentiated within,
the difference is external to them.
The diverse moments, therefore,
conduct themselves with respect to each other,
not as identity and difference,
but only as moments different in general,
indifferent to each other and to their determinateness.

2. In diversity, as the indifference of difference,
reflection has in general become external;
difference is only a positedness or as sublated,
but is itself the whole reflection.
On closer consideration, both, identity and difference
are reflections, as we have just established;
each is the unity of it and its other,
each is the whole.
But the determinateness,
to be only identity or only difference,
is thus a sublated something.
They are not, therefore, qualities,
since their determinateness,
because of the immanent reflection,
is at the same time only as negation.
What we have is therefore this duplicity,
immanent reflection as such
and determinateness as negation or positedness.
Positedness is the reflection that is external to itself;
it is negation as negation
and consequently, indeed in itself
self-referring negation and immanent reflection,
but only in itself, implicitly;
its reference is to a something external.

Reflection in itself and external reflection are
thus the two determinations
in which the moments of difference,
identity and difference, are posited.
They are these moments themselves
as they have determined themselves at this point.
Immanent reflection is identity,
but determined to be indifferent to difference,
not to have difference at all but to conduct
itself towards difference as identical with itself;
it is diversity.
It is identity that has so reflected itself into itself
that it truly is the one reflection of
the two moments into themselves;
both are immanent reflections.
Identity is this one reflection of the two,
the identity which has difference within it
only as an indifferent difference
and is diversity in general.
External reflection, on the contrary,
is their determinate difference,
not as absolute immanent reflection,
but as a determination towards which
the implicitly present reflection is indifferent;
its two moments, identity and difference themselves,
are thus externally posited,
are not determinations that
exist in and for themselves.

Now this external identity is likeness,
and external difference is unlikeness.
Likeness is indeed identity,
but only as a positedness,
an identity which is not in and for itself.
Unlikeness is equally difference,
but an external difference which is not, in and for itself,
the difference of the unlike itself.
Whether something is like or unlike something else is
not the concern of either the like or the unlike;
each refers only to itself, each is in and for itself what it is;
identity or non-identity, in the sense of likeness or unlikeness,
depend on the point of view of a third external to them.

3. External reflection connects diversity by
referring it to likeness and unlikeness.
This reference, which is a comparing,
moves back and forth from likeness
to unlikeness and from unlikeness to likeness.
But this back and forth referring of
likeness and unlikeness is
external to these determinations themselves;
moreover, they are not referred to each other,
but each, for itself, is referred to a third.
In this alternation,
each immediately stands out on its own.
External reflection is as such external to itself;
determinate difference is negated absolute difference;
it is not simple difference, therefore,
not an immanent reflection,
but has this reflection outside it;
hence its moments come apart
and both refer,
each also outside the other,
to the immanent reflection
confronting them.

In reflection thus alienated from itself,
likeness and unlikeness present themselves,
therefore, as themselves unconnected,
and reflection keeps them apart,
for it refers them to one and the same
something by means of “in so far,”
“from this side or that,”
and “from this view or that.”
Thus diverse things that are one and the same,
when likeness and unlikeness are said of them,
are from one side like each other,
but from another side unlike,
and in so far as they are alike,
to that extent they are not unlike.
Likeness thus refers only to itself,
and unlikeness is equally only unlikeness.

Because of this separation from each other,
they sublate themselves.
Precisely that which should save them
from contradiction and dissolution,
namely that something is like another in one respect
but unlike in another precisely this keeping of
likeness and unlikeness apart, is their destruction.
For both are determinations of difference;
they are references to each other,
each intended to be what the other is not;
the like is not the unlike,
and the unlike is not the like;
both have this connecting reference essentially,
and have no meaning outside it;
as determinations of difference,
each is what it is as different from its other.
But because of their indifference to each other,
the likeness is referred to itself,
and similarly is unlikeness a point of view of
its own and a reflection unto itself;
each, therefore, is like itself;
difference has vanished, since they have no
determinateness to oppose them;
in other words, each is consequently only likeness.

Accordingly, this indifferent viewpoint
or the external difference sublates itself
and it is in itself the negativity of itself.
It is the negativity which in comparing
belongs to that which does the comparing.
This latter oscillates from likeness
to unlikeness and back again;
hence it lets the one disappear into the other
and is in fact the negative unity of both.
This negative unity transcends at first
what is compared as well as
the moments of the comparing as
a subjective operation that falls outside them.
But the result is that this unity is
in fact the nature of likeness and unlikeness themselves.
Even the independent viewpoint
that each of these is,
is rather the self-reference
that sublates their distinctness
and so, too, themselves.

From this side, as moments of external reflection
and as external to themselves,
likeness and unlikeness disappear together into their likeness.
But this, their negative unity,
is in addition also posited in them;
for their reflection implicitly exists
outside them, that is, they are the likeness and
unlikeness of a third,
of another than they themselves are.
Thus the like is not the like of itself,
and the unlike, as the unlike not of itself
but of an unlike to it,
is itself the like.
The like and the unlike is
each therefore the unlike of itself.
Each is thereby this reflection:
likeness, that it is itself and the unlikeness;
unlikeness, that it is itself and the likeness.
Likeness and unlikeness constituted
the side of positedness as against
what is being compared or the diverse
which, as contrasted with them,
had determined itself as implicitly existent reflection.
But this positedness has consequently equally
lost its determinateness as against this reflection.

Likeness and unlikeness,
the determinations of external reflection,
are precisely the merely
implicitly existent reflection
which the diverse as such was supposed to be,
its only indeterminate difference.
Implicitly existent reflection is
self-reference without negation,
abstract self-identity
and therefore positedness itself.
The merely diverse thus passes over
through the positedness
into negative reflection.
The diverse is difference
which is merely posited,
hence a difference which is no difference,
hence a negation that negates itself within.
Likeness and unlikeness themselves, the positedness,
thus return through indifference
or through implicitly existing reflection
back into negative unity with themselves,
into the reflection which is
the implicit difference of likeness and unlikeness.
Diversity, the indifferent sides of which
are just as much simply and solely
moments of a negative unity, is opposition.

3. Opposition

In opposition, the determinate reflection,
difference, is brought to completion.
Opposition is the unity of identity and diversity;
its moments are diverse in one identity,
and so they are opposites.

Identity and difference are the moments of
difference as held inside difference itself;
they are reflected moments of its unity.
Likeness and unlikeness are instead
the externalized reflection;
their self-identity is not only the indifference
of each towards the other differentiated from it,
but towards being-in-and-for-itself as such;
theirs is a self-identity that contrasts with
identity reflected into itself,
hence an immediacy which is not reflected into itself.
The positedness of the sides of
external reflection is therefore a being,
just as their non-positedness is a non-being.

On closer consideration, the moments of opposition are
positedness reflected into itself
or determination in general.
Positedness is likeness and unlikeness;
these two, reflected into themselves,
constitute the determinations of opposition.
Their immanent reflection consists in that
each is within it the unity of likeness and unlikeness.
Likeness is only in a reflection
which compares according to the unlikeness
and is therefore mediated by its
other indifferent moment; similarly,
unlikeness is only in the same
reflective reference in which likeness is.
Each of these moments, in its determinateness,
is therefore the whole.
It is the whole because it also contains its other moment;
but this, its other, is an indifferent existent;
thus each contains a reference to its non-being,
and it is reflection-into-itself, or the whole,
only as essentially referring to its non-being.

This self-likeness, reflected into itself
and containing the reference to
unlikeness within it, is the positive;
and the unlikeness that contains within itself
the reference to its non-being,
to likeness, is the negative.
Or again, both are positedness;
now in so far as the differentiated determinateness is
taken as a differentiated determinate reference of
positedness to itself, opposition is, on the one hand,
positedness reflected into its likeness with itself;
and, on the other hand, it is the same positedness
reflected into its inequality with itself:
the positive and the negative.
The positive is positedness as reflected into self-likeness;
but what is reflected is positedness, that is,
the negation as negation,
and so this immanent reflection has
the reference to the other for its determination.
The negative is positedness as reflected into unlikeness;
but positedness is the unlikeness itself,
and so this reflection is therefore
the identity of unlikeness with itself
and absolute self-reference.
Each, therefore, equally has the other in it:
positedness reflected into self-likeness has the unlikeness;
and positedness reflected into self-unlikeness, the likeness.

The positive and the negative are thus
the sides of opposition that have become self-subsisting.
They are self-subsisting because they are
the reflection of the whole into itself,
and they belong to opposition in so far
as the latter is determinateness
which, as the whole, is reflected into itself.
Because of their self-subsistence,
the opposition which they constitute is
implicitly determinate.
Each is itself and its other;
for this reason, each has its determinateness
not in an other but within.
Each refers itself to itself
only as referring itself to its other.
This has a twofold aspect.
Each is the reference to its non-being as
the sublating of this otherness in itself;
its non-being is thus only a moment in it.
But, on the other hand, here positedness
has become a being, an indifferent subsistence;
the other of itself which each contains is
therefore also the non-being of that in which
it should be contained only as a moment.
Each is, therefore, only to the
extent that its non-being is,
the two in an identical reference.

The determinations which constitute
the positive and the negative consist,
therefore, in that the positive and the negative are,
first, absolute moments of opposition;
their subsistence is indivisibly one reflection;
it is one mediation in which each is
by virtue of the non-being of its other,
hence by virtue of its other
or its own non-being.
Thus they are simply opposites;
or each is only the opposite of the other;
the one is not yet the positive
and the other not yet the negative,
but both are negative with
respect to each other.
Each, therefore, simply is,
first, to the extent that the other is;
it is what it is by virtue of the other,
by virtue of its own non-being;
it is only positedness.
Second, it is to the extent that
the other is not; it is what it is
by virtue of the non-being of the other;
it is reflection into itself.
The two, however, are both
the one mediation of opposition as such
in which they simply are only posited moments.

Moreover, this mere positedness is
reflected into itself in general
and, according to this moment of external reflection,
the positive and the negative are indifferent towards
this first identity where they are only moments;
or again, because that first reflection is
the positive's and the negative's own
reflection into itself,
each is indifferent towards its reflection
into its non-being, towards its own positedness.
The two sides are thus merely diverse,
and because their determinateness
that they are positive or negative
constitutes their positedness as against each other,
each is not specifically so determined internally
but is only determinateness in general;
to each side, therefore, there belongs indeed
one of the two determinacies,
the positive or the negative;
but the two can be interchanged,
and each side is such as
can be taken equally as positive or negative.

But, in third place, the positive and the negative are
not only a posited being,
nor are they something merely indifferent,
but their positedness,
or the reference to the other in the one unity
which they themselves are not,
is rather taken back into each.
Each is itself positive and negative within;
the positive and the negative are
the determination of reflection in and for itself;
only in this reflection of the opposite into itself is
the opposite either positive or negative.
The positive has within it the reference to
the other in which the determinateness of the positive consists.
And the same applies to the negative:
it is not negative as contrasted with another
but has the determinateness by which it is negative within.

Each is thus self-subsistent unity existing for itself.
The positive is indeed a positedness,
but in such a way that the positedness is
for it posited being as sublated.
It is the non-opposed, the sublated opposition,
but as the side of the opposition itself.
As positive, it is indeed a something
which is determined with reference to an otherness,
but in such a way that its nature
is not to be something posited;
it is the immanent reflection
that negates otherness.
But its other, the negative,
is itself no longer positedness or a moment
but itself a self-subsisting being
and so the negating reflection
of the positive is internally
determined to exclude this being,
which is its non-being, from itself.

Thus the negative, as absolute reflection,
is not the immediate negative
but is the negative as sublated positedness,
the negative in and for itself
which positively rests upon itself.
As immanent reflection,
it negates its reference to its other;
its other is the positive,
a self-subsisting being
hence its negative reference
to this positive is
the excluding of it from itself.
The negative is the independently existing opposite,
over against the positive
which is the determination of the sublated opposition,
the whole opposition resting upon itself,
opposed to the self-identical positedness.

The positive and the negative are such, therefore,
not just in themselves, but in and for themselves.
They are in themselves positive and negative
when they are abstracted from their excluding
reference to the other
and are taken only in accordance
with their determination.
Something is in itself positive or negative
when it is not supposed to be
determined as positive or negative
merely in contrast with the other.
But the positive and the negative,
taken not as a positedness
and hence not as opposed,
are each an immediate,
being and non-being.
They are, however, moments of opposition:
their in-itself constitutes only
the form of their immanent reflectedness.
Something is said to be positive in itself,
outside the reference to something negative,
and something negative in itself,
outside the reference to something negative:
in this determination, merely the abstract moment of
this reflectedness is held on to.
However, to say that the positive and the negative
exist in themselves essentially implies that
to be opposed is not a mere moment,
nor that it is just a matter of comparison,
but that it is the determination of the sides
themselves of the opposition.
The sides, as positive or negative in themselves,
are not, therefore, outside the reference to the other;
on the contrary, this reference, precisely as exclusive,
constitutes their determination or their in-itselfness;
in this, therefore, they are at the same time
in and for themselves.
