
BOOK ONE

The Doctrine of Being

WITH WHAT MUST THE BEGINNING OF SCIENCE BE MADE?

It is only in recent times that
there has been a new awareness of
the difficulty of finding a beginning in philosophy,
and the reason for this difficulty,
and so also the possibility of resolving it,
have been discussed in a variety of ways.
The beginning of philosophy must be either
something mediated or something immediate,
and it is easy to show that it can be
neither the one nor the other;
so either way of beginning runs into contradiction.

The principle of a philosophy also
expresses a beginning, of course,
but not so much a subjective as an objective one,
the beginning of all things.
The principle is a somehow determinate content:
“water,” “the one,” “nous,” “idea,” or “substance,” “monad,” etc.
or, if it designates the nature of cognition
and is therefore meant simply as a criterion
rather than an objective determination,
as “thinking,” “intuition,” “sensation,” “I,” even “subjectivity,”
then here too the interest still lies in the content determination.
The beginning as such, on the other hand,
as something subjective in the sense that
it is an accidental way of introducing the exposition,
is left unconsidered, a matter of indifference,
and consequently also the need to ask
with what a beginning should be made remains
of no importance in face of the need for the principle
in which alone the interest of the fact seems to lie,
the interest as to what is the truth,
the absolute ground of everything.

But the modern perplexity about a beginning
proceeds from a further need which escapes
those who are either busy demonstrating
their principle dogmatically
or skeptically looking for a subjective criterion
against dogmatic philosophizing,
and is outright denied by those who begin,
like a shot from a pistol,
from their inner revelation,
from faith, intellectual intuition, etc.
and who would be exempt from method and logic.
If earlier abstract thought is at first interested only
in the principle as content,
but is driven as philosophical culture advances
to the other side to pay attention to
the conduct of the cognitive process,
then the subjective activity has also been grasped
as an essential moment of objective truth,
and with this there comes the need to unite
the method with the content,
the form with the principle.
Thus the principle ought to be
also the beginning,
and that which has priority for thinking
ought to be also the first
in the process of thinking.

Here we only have to consider
how the logical beginning appears.
The two sides from which it can be
taken have already been named,
namely either by way of mediation as result,
or immediately as beginning proper.
This is not the place to discuss the question
apparently so important to present-day culture,
whether the knowledge of truth is
an immediate awareness that begins absolutely, a faith,
or rather a mediated knowledge.
In so far as the issue allows passing treatment,
this has already been done elsewhere
(in my Encyclopedia of the Philosophical Sciences, 3rd edn,
in the Prefatory Concept, §§21ff.).
Here we may quote from it only this,
that there is nothing in heaven or nature or spirit or anywhere else
that does not contain just as much immediacy as mediation,
so that both these determinations prove
to be unseparated and inseparable
and the opposition between them nothing real.
As for a scientific discussion,
a case in point is every logical proposition
in which we find the determinations of immediacy and mediacy
and where there is also entailed, therefore,
a discussion of their opposition and their truth.
This opposition, when connected
to thinking, to knowledge, to cognition,
assumes the more concrete shape
of immediate or mediated knowledge,
and it is then up to the science of logic
to consider the nature of cognition in general,
while the more concrete forms of
the same cognition fall within the scope of
the science of spirit and the phenomenology of spirit.
But to want to clarify the nature of cognition prior to science
is to demand that it should be discussed outside science,
and outside science this cannot be done,
at least not in the scientific manner
which alone is the issue here.

A beginning is logical in that it is to be made in
the element of a free, self-contained thought, in pure knowledge;
it is thereby mediated, for pure knowledge is
the ultimate and absolute truth of consciousness.
We said in the Introduction that the Phenomenology of Spirit is
the science of consciousness, its exposition;
that consciousness has the concept of science,
that is, pure knowledge, for its result.
To this extent, logic has for its presupposition
the science of spirit in its appearance,
a science which contains the necessity,
and therefore demonstrates the truth,
of the stand-point which is pure knowledge
and of its mediation.
In this science of spirit in its appearance
the beginning is made from empirical, sensuous consciousness,
and it is this consciousness which is
immediate knowledge in the strict sense;
there, in this science, is where its nature is discussed.
Any other consciousness, such as faith in divine truths,
inner experience, knowledge through inner revelation, etc.,
proves upon cursory reflection to be very ill-suited
as an instance of immediate knowledge.
In the said treatise, immediate consciousness is also
that which in the science comes first and immediately
and is therefore a presupposition;
but in logic the presupposition is
what has proved itself to be the result
of that preceding consideration,
namely the idea as pure knowledge.
Logic is the pure science, that is,
pure knowledge in the full compass of its development.
But in that result the idea has the determination of
a certainty that has become truth;
it is a certainty which, on the one hand, no longer stands
over and against a subject matter confronting it externally
but has interiorized it, is knowingly aware
that the subject matter is itself;
and, on the other hand, has relinquished
any knowledge of itself that would oppose it to objectivity
and would reduce the latter to a nothing;
it has externalized this subjectivity
and is at one with its externalization.

Now starting with this determination of pure knowledge,
all that we have to do to ensure that the beginning will remain
immanent to the science of this knowledge is to consider,
or rather, setting aside every reflection,
simply to take up, what is there before us.
Pure knowledge, thus withdrawn into this unity,
has sublated every reference to an other and to mediation;
it is without distinctions and as thus distinctionless
it ceases to be knowledge;
what we have before us is only simple immediacy.

Simple immediacy is itself an expression of reflection;
it refers to the distinction from what is mediated.
The true expression of this simple immediacy is therefore pure being.
Just as pure knowledge should mean nothing but knowledge as such,
so also pure being should mean nothing but being in general;
being, and nothing else, without further determination and filling.

Being is what makes the beginning here;
it is presented indeed as originating through mediation,
but a mediation which at the same time sublates itself,
and the presupposition is of a pure knowledge
which is the result of finite knowledge, of consciousness.
But if no presupposition is to be made,
if the beginning is itself to be taken immediately,
then the only determination of this beginning is
that it is to be the beginning of logic, of thought as such.
There is only present the resolve,
which can also be viewed as arbitrary,
of considering thinking as such.
The beginning must then be absolute
or, what means the same here, must be an abstract beginning;
and so there is nothing that it may presuppose,
must not be mediated by anything or have a ground,
ought to be rather itself the ground of the entire science.
It must therefore be simply an immediacy,
or rather only immediacy itself.
Just as it cannot have any determination with respect to an other,
so too it cannot have any within;
it cannot have any content, for any content would entail distinction
and the reference of distinct moments to each other,
and hence a mediation.
The beginning is therefore pure being.

After this simple exposition of what alone first belongs to
this simplest of all simples, the logical beginning,
we may add the following further reflections which should not serve,
however, as elucidation and confirmation of the exposition
[this is complete by itself]
but are rather occasioned by notions and reflections
which may come our way beforehand and yet,
like all other prejudices that antedate the science of logic,
must be disposed of within the science itself
and are therefore to be patiently deferred until then.

The insight that absolute truth must be a result,
and conversely, that a result presupposes a first truth
which, because it is first, objectively considered is
not necessary and from the subjective side is not known;
this insight has recently given rise to the thought
that philosophy can begin only with something
which is hypothetically and problematically true,
and that at first, therefore,
philosophizing can be only a quest.
This is a view that Reinhold has repeatedly urged
in the later stages of his philosophizing,
and which must be given credit for being
motivated by a genuine interest in
the speculative nature of philosophical beginning.
A critical examination of this view will also be
an occasion for introducing a preliminary understanding of
what progression in logic generally means,
for the view has direct implications
for the nature of this advance.
Indeed, as portrayed by it,
progression in philosophy would be
rather a retrogression and a grounding,
only by virtue of which it then follows as result that
that, with which the beginning was made,
was not just an arbitrary assumption
but was in fact the truth,
and the first truth at that.

It must be admitted that it is an essential consideration
(one which will be found elaborated again within the logic itself)
that progression is a retreat to the ground,
to the origin and the truth on which
that with which the beginning was made,
and from which it is in fact produced, depends.
Thus consciousness, on its forward path from
the immediacy with which it began,
is led back to the absolute knowledge
which is its innermost truth.
This truth, the ground, is then also
that from which the original first proceeds,
the same first which at the beginning
came on the scene as something immediate.
It is most of all in this way that absolute spirit
(which is revealed as the concrete and supreme truth of all being)
comes to be known, as at the end of the development
it freely externalizes itself,
letting itself go into the shape of an immediate being,
resolving itself into the creation of a world
which contains all that fell within the development
preceding that result and which,
through this reversal of position with its beginning,
is converted into something dependent
on the result as principle.
Essential to science is not so much that
a pure immediacy should be the beginning,
but that the whole of science is in itself a circle
in which the first becomes also the last,
and the last also the first.

Conversely, it follows that it is
just as necessary to consider as result
that into which the movement returns as to its ground.
In this respect, the first is just as much the ground,
and the last a derivative;
since the movement makes its start from the first
and by correct inferences arrives at the last
as the ground, this last is result.
Further, the advance from that which constitutes the beginning is
to be considered only as one more determination of the same advance,
so that this beginning remains as the underlying ground of
all that follows without vanishing from it.
The advance does not consist in the derivation of an other,
or in the transition to a truly other:
inasmuch as there is a transition,it is equally sublated again.
Thus the beginning of philosophy is the ever present
and self-preserving foundation of all subsequent developments,
remaining everywhere immanent in its further determinations.

In this advance the beginning thus loses the one-sidedness
that it has when determined simply as something immediate and abstract;
it becomes mediated, and the line of scientific forward movement
consequently turns into a circle.
It also follows that what constitutes the beginning,
because it is something still undeveloped and empty of content,
is not yet truly known at that beginning,
and that only science, and science fully developed,
is the completed cognition of it,
replete with content and finally truly grounded.

But for this reason,
because it is as absolute ground
that the result finally emerges,
the progression of this cognition
is not anything provisory,
still problematic and hypothetical,
but must be determined through the nature
of the matter at issue and of the content itself.
Nor is the said beginning an
arbitrary and only temporary assumption,
or something which seems to be an
arbitrary and tentative presupposition
but of which it is subsequently shown
that to make it the starting point
was indeed the right thing to do;
this is not as when we are instructed
to make certain constructions in order
to aid the proof of a geometrical theorem,
and only in retrospect, in the course of the proof,
does it become apparent that we did well to draw
precisely these lines and then, in the proof itself,
to begin by comparing them or the enclosed angles,
though the line-drawing or the comparing
themselves escape conceptual comprehension.

So we have just given, right within science itself,
the reason why in pure science
the beginning is made with pure being.
This pure being is the unity
into which pure knowledge returns,
or if this knowledge, as form,
is itself still to be kept
distinct from its unity,
then pure being is also its content.
It is in this respect that this pure being,
this absolute immediate,
is just as absolutely mediated.
However, just because it is here as the beginning,
it is just as essential that it should be taken
in the one-sidedness of being purely immediate.
If it were not this pure indeterminacy,
if it were determined,
it would be taken as something mediated,
would already be carried further than itself:
a determinate something has the character of an other
with respect to a first.
It thus lies in the nature of a beginning itself
that it should be being and nothing else.
There is no need, therefore,
of other preparations to enter philosophy,
no need of further reflections or access points.

Nor can we derive a more specific determination
or a more positive content
for the beginning of philosophy
from the fact that it is such a beginning.
For here, at the beginning, where the fact
itself is not yet at hand,
philosophy is an empty word,
a received and yet unjustified notion.
Pure knowledge yields only this negative determination,
namely that the beginning ought to be abstract.
If pure being is taken as the content of pure knowledge,
then the latter must step back from its content,
allowing it free play and without determining it further.
Or again, inasmuch as pure being is to be considered
as the unity into which knowledge has collapsed
when at the highest point of union with its objectification,
knowledge has then disappeared into this unity,
leaving behind no distinction from it
and hence no determination for it.
Nor is there anything else present, any content whatever,
that could be used to make a more determinate beginning with it.

But, it may be said, the determination of being
assumed so far as the beginning can also be let go,
so that the only requirement would be
that a pure beginning should be made.
Nothing would then be at hand
except the beginning itself,
and we must see what this would be.
This position could be suggested also for the benefit
of those who are either not comfortable,
for whatever reason, with beginning with being
and even less with the transition into nothing
that follows from being,
or who simply do not know how else to make a beginning
in a science except by presupposing a representation
which is subsequently analyzed,
the result of the analysis then yielding
the first determinate concept in the science.
If we also want to test this strategy,
we must relinquish every particular object
that we may intend, since the beginning,
as the beginning of thought,
is meant to be entirely abstract,
entirely general, all form with no content;
we must have nothing, therefore,
except the representation of a mere beginning as such.
We have, therefore, only to see
what there is in this representation.

As yet there is nothing, and something is supposed to become.
The beginning is not pure nothing but a nothing, rather,
from which something is to proceed;
also being, therefore, is already contained in the beginning.
Therefore, the beginning contains both, being and nothing;
it is the unity of being and nothing,
or is non-being which is at the same time being,
and being which is at the same time non-being.

Further, being and nothing are present
in the beginning as distinguished;
for the beginning points to something other;
it is a non-being which refers to an other;
that which begins, as yet is not;
it only reaches out to being.
The being contained in the beginning is such, therefore,
that it distances itself from non-being
or sublates it as something which is opposed to it.
But further, that which begins already is,
but is also just as much not yet.
The opposites, being and non-being, are
therefore in immediate union in it;
or the beginning is their undifferentiated unity.

An analysis of the beginning would thus yield
the concept of the unity of being and non-being;
or, in a more reflected form, the concept of the unity
of differentiated and undifferentiated being;
or of the identity of identity and non-identity.
This concept could be regarded as the first,
purest, that is, most abstract, definition of the absolute;
as it would indeed be if the issue were just
the form of definitions and the name of the absolute.
In this sense, just as such an abstract concept
would be the first definition of the absolute,
so all further determinations and developments would be only
more determinate and richer definitions of it.
But let those who are not satisfied with being as the beginning,
since being passes over into nothing
and what emerges is the unity of the two,
let them consider what is more likely to satisfy them:
this beginning that begins with the representation
of the beginning and an analysis of it
(an analysis that is indeed correct yet
equally leads to the unity of being and non-being)
or a beginning which makes being the beginning.

But, regarding this strategy,
there is still a further observation to be made.
The said analysis presupposes that
the representation of the beginning is known;
its strategy follows the example of other sciences.
These presuppose their object and presume that
everyone has the same representation of it
and will find in it roughly the same determinations
which they have collected here or there,
through analysis, comparison, and sundry argumentation,
and they then offer as its representations.
But that which constitutes the absolute beginning must
likewise be something otherwise known;
now, if it is something concrete
and hence in itself variously determined,
then this connectedness which it is
in itself is presupposed as a known;
the connectedness is thereby adduced
as something immediate, which however it is not;
for it is connectedness only as
a connection of distinct elements
and therefore contains mediation within itself.
Further, the accidentality
and the arbitrariness of the analysis
and the specific mode of determination
affect the concrete internally.
Which determinations are elicited depends
on what each individual happens to discover
in his immediate accidental representation.
The connection contained within a concrete something,
within a synthetic unity, is necessary only in so far
as it is not found already given but is produced rather
by the spontaneous return of the moments back into this unity,
a movement which is the opposite of the analytical
procedure that occurs rather within the subject
and is external to the fact itself.

Here we then have the precise reason why
that with which the beginning is to be made
cannot be anything concrete,
anything containing a connection within its self.
It is because, as such, it would presuppose
within itself a process of mediation
and the transition from a first to an other,
of which process the concrete something,
now become a simple, would be the result.
But the beginning ought not itself to be
already a first and an other,
for anything which is
in itself a first and an other
implies that an advance has already been made.
Consequently, that which constitutes
the beginning, the beginning itself,
is to be taken as something unanalyzable,
taken in its simple, unfilled immediacy;
and therefore as being,
as complete emptiness.

If, impatient with this talk of an abstract beginning,
one should say that the beginning is to be made,
not with the beginning, but directly with the fact itself,
well then, this subject matter is nothing else
than that empty being.
For what this subject matter is,
that is precisely what ought to result
only in the course of the science,
what the latter cannot presuppose to know in advance.

On any other form otherwise assumed
in an effort to have a beginning
other than empty being,
that beginning would still
suffer from the same defects.
Let those who are still dissatisfied
with this beginning take upon themselves
the challenge of beginning in some other way
and yet avoiding such defects.

But we cannot leave entirely unmentioned
a more original beginning to philosophy
which has recently gained notoriety,
the beginning with the “I.”
It derived from both the reflection that
all that follows from the first truth
must be deduced from it,
and the need that this first truth
should be something with which one is already acquainted,
and even more than just acquainted,
something of which one is immediately certain.
This proposed beginning is not,
as such, an accidental representation,
or one which might be one thing
to one subject and something else to another.
For the “I,” this immediate consciousness of the self,
appears from the start to be both itself
an immediate something and something with which
we are acquainted in a much deeper sense
than with any other representation;
true, anything else known belongs to this “I,”
but it belongs to it as a content which remains
distinct from it and is therefore accidental;
the “I,” by contrast, is the simple certainty of its self.
But the “I” is, as such, at the same time also a concrete,
or rather, the “I” is the most concrete of all things,
the consciousness of itself as an infinitely manifold world.
Before the “I” can be the beginning and foundation of philosophy,
this concreteness must be excised,
and this is the absolute act by virtue of which
the “I” purifies itself and makes its entrance
into consciousness as abstract “I.”
But this pure “I” is now not immediate,
is not the familiar, ordinary “I” of our consciousness
to which everyone immediately links science.
Truly, that act of excision would be
none other than the elevation to the standpoint of pure knowledge in
which the distinction between subject and object has disappeared.
But as thus immediately demanded,
this elevation is a subjective postulate;
before it proves itself as a valid demand,
the progression of the concrete “I”
from immediate consciousness to pure knowledge
must be demonstratively exhibited within the “I” itself,
through its own necessity.
Without this objective movement, pure knowledge,
also when defined as intellectual intuition,
appears as an arbitrary standpoint,
itself one of those empirical states of consciousness
for which everything depends on whether someone,
though not necessarily somebody else,
discovers it within himself
or is able to produce it there.
But inasmuch as this pure “I” must be essential, pure knowledge;
and pure knowledge is however one which is only posited in
individual consciousness through an absolute act of self-elevation,
is not present in it immediately;
we lose the very advantage which was to derive
from this beginning of philosophy,
namely that it is something with which
everyone is well acquainted,
something which everyone finds within himself
and to which he can attach further reflection;
that pure “I,” on the contrary,
in its abstract, essential nature,
is to ordinary consciousness an unknown,
something that the latter does not find within itself.
What comes with it is rather the disadvantage of
the illusion that we are speaking of something supposedly very familiar,
the “I” of empirical self-consciousness,
whereas at issue is in fact something far removed from the latter.
Determining pure knowledge as “I” acts as
a continuing reminder of the subjective “I”
whose limitations should rather be forgotten;
it leads to the belief that the propositions and relations
which result from the further development
of the “I” occur within ordinary consciousness
and can be found pregiven there,
indeed that the whole issue is about this consciousness.
This mistake, far from bringing clarity,
produces instead an even more glaring and bewildering confusion;
among the public at large, it has occasioned
the crudest of misunderstandings.

Further, as regards the subjective determinateness of the “I” in general,
pure knowledge does remove from it the restriction that it has
when understood as standing in unsurmountable opposition to an object.
But for this reason it would be at least superfluous
still to hold on to this subjective attitude
by determining pure knowledge as “I.”
For this determination not only carries with it
that troublesome duality of subject and object;
on closer examination, it also remains a subjective “I.”
The actual development of the science that proceeds from the “I”
shows that in the course of it the object has and retains
the self-perpetuating determination of an other
with respect to the “I”;
that therefore the “I” from which the start was made
does not have the pure knowledge that has truly overcome
the opposition of consciousness,
but is rather still entangled in appearance.
In this connection, there is the further
essential observation to be made that,
although the “I” might well be determined to be
in itself pure knowledge or intellectual intuition
and declared to be the beginning,
in science we are not concerned with
what is present in itself or as something inner,
but with the external existence rather of what in thought is inner
and with the determinateness which this inner assumes in that existence.
But whatever externalization there might be of
intellectual intuition at the beginning of science,
or if the subject matter of science is called
the eternal, the divine, the absolute,
of the eternal or absolute,
this cannot be anything else than a first, immediate, simple determination.
Whatever richer name be given to it than is expressed by mere being,
the only legitimate consideration is how
such an absolute enters into discursive knowledge
and the enunciation of this knowledge.
Intellectual intuition might well be the violent rejection
of mediation and of demonstrative, external reflection.
However, anything which it says over and above
simple immediacy would be something concrete,
and this concrete would contain a diversity of determinations in it.
But, as already remarked, the enunciation and exposition
of this concrete something is a process of mediation
which starts with one of the determinations and proceeds to another,
even though this other returns to the first;
and this is a movement which, moreover, is
not allowed to be arbitrary or assertoric.
Consequently, that from which the beginning is made in any
such exposition is not something itself concrete
but only the simple immediacy from which the movement proceeds.
Besides, what is lacking if we make something concrete the beginning
is the demonstration which the combination of the determinations
contained in it requires.

Therefore, if in the expression of the absolute,
or the eternal, or God
(and God would have the perfectly undisputed right
that the beginning be made with him),
if in the intuition or the thought of them,
there is more than there is in pure being,
then this more should first emerge in a knowledge
which is discursive and not figurative;
as rich as what is implicitly contained in knowledge may be,
the determination that first emerges in it is something simple,
for it is only in the immediate that no advance is
yet made from one thing to an other.
Consequently, whatever in the richer
representations of the absolute or God
might be said or implied over and above being,
all this is at the beginning
only an empty word and only being;
this simple determination which has no further meaning
besides, this empty something, is as such, therefore,
the beginning of philosophy.

This insight is itself so simple
that this beginning is as beginning
in no need of any preparation or further introduction,
and the only possible purpose of
this preliminary disquisition regarding it
was not to lead up to it
but to dispense rather with all preliminaries.

GENERAL DIVISION OF BEING

Being is determined, first, as against another in general;
secondly, it is internally self-determining;
thirdly, as this preliminary division is cast off,
it is the abstract indeterminateness and immediacy
in which it must be the beginning.

According to the first determination,
being partitions itself off from essence,
for further on in its development it proves to be
in its totality only one sphere of the concept,
and to this sphere as moment it opposes another sphere.
According to the second, it is the sphere
within which fall the determinations
and the entire movement of its reflection.

In this, being will posit itself in three determinations:

I. as determinateness; as such, quality;

II. as sublated determinateness; magnitude, quantity;

III. as qualitatively determined quantity; measure.

This division, as was generally remarked of
such divisions in the Introduction,
is here a preliminary statement;
its determinations must first arise
from the movement of being itself,
and receive their definitions and justification by virtue of it.
As regards the divergence of this division from
the usual listing of the categories,
namely quantity, quality, relation and modality,
(for Kant, incidentally, these are supposed to be
only classifications of his categories,
but are in fact themselves categories,
only more abstract ones;
about this, there is nothing to remark here,
since the entire listing will diverge from
the usual ordering and meaning of
the categories at every point.)

This only can perhaps be remarked,
that the determination of quantity
is ordinarily listed ahead of quality and as a rule
this is done for no given reason.
It has already been shown that
the beginning is made with being as such,
and hence with qualitative being.
It is clear from a comparison of quality with quantity
that the former is by nature first.
For quantity is quality which has already become negative;
magnitude is the determinateness which,
no longer one with being but already distinguished from it,
is the sublated quality that has become indifferent.
It includes the alterability of being
without altering the fact itself,
namely being, of which it is the determination;
qualitative determinateness is on the contrary one with its being,
it neither transcends it nor stays within it
but is its immediate restrictedness.
Hence quality, as the determinateness which is immediate,
is the first and it is with it that the beginning is to be made.

Measure is a relation, not relation in general
but specifically of quality and quantity to each other;
the categories dealt with by Kant under relation
will come up elsewhere in their proper place.
Measure, if one so wishes, can be considered also a modality;
but since with Kant modality is no longer
supposed to make up a determination of content,
but only concerns the reference of the content
to thought, to the subjective,
the result is a totally heterogeneous reference
that does not belong here.

The third determination of being falls within
the section Quality inasmuch as being, as abstract immediacy,
reduces itself to one single determinateness
as against its other determinacies inside its sphere.
