
B. SHINE

1. Being is shine.

The being of shine consists solely
in the sublatedness of being,
in being's nothingness;
this nothingness it has in essence,
apart from its nothingness,
apart from essence, it does not exist.
It is the negative posited as negative.

Shine is all that remains of the sphere of being.
But it still seems to have an immediate side
which is independent of essence
and to be, in general, an other of essence.
Other entails in general the two moments
of existence and non-existence.
Since the unessential no longer has a being,
what is left to it of otherness is
only the pure moment of non-existence;
shine is this immediate non-existence,
a non-existence in the determinateness of being,
so that it has existence only with reference to another,
in its non-existence;
it is the non-self-subsistent
which exists only in its negation.
What is left over to it is thus only
the pure determinateness of immediacy;
it is as reflected immediacy, that is,
one which is only by virtue of
the mediation of its negation
and which, over against this mediation, is
nothing except the empty determination
of the immediacy of non-existence.

Shine, the “phenomenon” of skepticism,
and also the “appearance” of idealism,
is thus this immediacy which is not
a something nor a thing in general,
not an indifferent being that would exist apart
from its determinateness and connection with the subject.
Skepticism did not permit itself to say “It is,”
and the more recent idealism did not permit itself
to regard cognitions as a knowledge of the thing-in-itself.
The shine of the former was supposed absolutely
not to have the foundation of a being:
the thing-in-itself was not supposed
to enter into these cognitions.
But at the same time skepticism allowed
a manifold of determinations for its shine,
or rather the latter turned out to have
the full richness of the world for its content.
Likewise for the appearance of idealism:
it encompassed the full range of these manifold determinacies.
So, the shine of skepticism and the appearance of idealism
do immediately have a manifold of determination.
This content, therefore, might well have no being as foundation,
no thing or thing-in-itself;
for itself, it remains as it is;
it is simply transposed from being into shine,
so that the latter has within itself those manifold
determinacies that exist immediately,
each an other to the other.
The shine is thus itself something immediately determined.
It can have this or that content;
but whatever content it has, it has not posited it
but possesses it immediately.
Idealism, whether Leibnizian, Kantian, Fichtean, or in any
other form, has not gone further than skepticism in this:
it has not advanced beyond being as determinateness.
Skepticism lets the content of its shine to be given to it;
the shine exists for it immediately,
whatever content it might have.
The Leibnizian monad develops its representations from itself
but is not their generating and controlling force;
they rise up in it as a froth, indifferent,
immediately present to each other and to the monad as well.
Likewise Kant's appearance is a given content of perception
that presupposes affections, determinations of the subject
which are immediate to each other and to the subject.
As for the infinite obstacle of Fichte's Idealism,
it might well be that it has no thing-in-itself for foundation,
so that it becomes a determinateness purely within the “I.”
But this determinateness that the “I” makes its own,
sublating its externality,
is to the “I” at the same time an immediate determinateness,
a limitation of the “I” which the latter may transcend
but which contains a side of indifference,
and on account of this indifference,
although internal to the “I,”
it entails an immediate non-being of it.

2. Shine thus contains an immediate presupposition,
an independent side vis-à-vis essence.
But the task, inasmuch as this shine is distinct from essence,
is not to demonstrate that it sublates itself
and returns into essence,
for being has returned into essence in its totality;
shine is the null as such.
The task is to demonstrate that the determinations which
distinguish it from essence are the determinations of essence itself;
further, that this determinateness of essence,
which shine is, is sublated in essence itself.

What constitutes the shine is
the immediacy of non-being;
this non-being, however, is nothing else than
the negativity of essence within essence itself.
In essence, being is non-being.
Its inherent nothingness is the
negative nature of essence itself.
But the immediacy or indifference
which this non-being contains is
essences's own absolute in-itself.
The negativity of essence is its self-equality
or its simple immediacy and indifference.
Being has preserved itself in essence inasmuch
as this latter, in its infinite negativity,
has this equality with itself;
it is through this that essence is itself being.
The immediacy that the determinateness has
in shine against essence is
thus none other than essence's own immediacy,
though not the immediacy of an existent
but rather the absolutely mediated
or reflective immediacy which is shine;
being, not as being, but only as
the determinateness of being as against mediation;
being as moment.

These two moments [nothingness but as subsisting],
and being but as moment;
or again, negativity existing in itself and reflected immediacy,
these two moments that are the moments of shine,
are thus the moments of essence itself;
it is not that there is a shine of being in essence,
or a shine of essence in being:
the shine in the essence is not the shine of an other
but is rather shine as such, the shine of essence itself.

Shine is essence itself in the determinateness of being.
Essence has a shine because it is determined within itself
and is therefore distinguished from its absolute unity.
But this determinateness is as determinateness
just as absolutely sublated in it.
For essence is what stands on its own:
it exists as self-mediating through a negation which it itself is.
It is, therefore, the identical unit of absolute negativity and immediacy.
The negativity is negativity in itself;
it is its reference to itself and thus immediacy in itself.
But it is negative reference to itself,
a self-repelling negating;
thus the immediacy existing in itself is
the negative or the determinate over against the negativity.
But this determinateness is itself absolute negativity
and this determining, which as determining immediately sublates itself,
is a turning back into itself.

Shine is the negative which has a being,
but in another, in its negation;
it is a non-self-subsisting-being
which is sublated within and null.
And so it is the negative which returns into itself,
the non-subsistent as such, internally non-subsistent.
This reference of the negative or
the non-subsistent to itself is
the immediacy of this non-subsistent;
it is an other than it;
it is its determinateness over against it,
or the negation over against the negative.
But this negation which stands over against the negative is
negativity as referring solely to itself,
the absolute sublation of the determinateness itself.

The determinateness that shine is in essence is,
therefore, infinite determinateness;
it is only the negative which coincides with itself
and hence a determinateness that, as determinateness,
is self-subsistence and not determined.
Contrariwise, the self-subsistence, as self-referring immediacy,
equally is just determinateness and moment,
negativity solely referring to itself.
This negativity which is identical with immediacy,
and thus the immediacy which is identical with negativity, is essence.
Shine is, therefore, essence itself,
but essence in a determinateness, in such a way, however,
that the determinateness is only a moment,
and the essence is the shining of itself within itself.

In the sphere of being, non-being arises over against being,
each equally an immediate, and the truth of both is becoming.
In the sphere of essence, we have the contrast
first of essence and the non-essential,
then of essence and shine,
the non-essential and the shine
being both the leftover of being.
But these two, and no less the
distinction of essence from them,
consist solely in this:
that essence is taken at first as an immediate,
not as it is in itself,
namely as an immediacy which is immediacy
as pure mediacy or absolute negativity.
This first immediacy is thus only the determinateness of immediacy.
The sublating of this determinateness of essence consists, therefore,
in nothing further than showing that the unessential is only shine,
and that essence rather contains this shine within itself.
For essence is an infinite self-contained movement
which determines its immediacy as negativity
and its negativity as immediacy,
and is thus the shining of itself within itself.
In this, in its self-movement,
essence is reflection.
