
CHAPTER 2

The idea of cognition

Life is the immediate idea, or the idea as
its still internally unrealized concept.
In its judgment, the idea is cognition in general.

The concept is for itself as concept
inasmuch as it freely and concretely exists
as abstract universality or a genus.
As such, it is its pure self-identity
that internally differentiates itself
in such a way that the differentiated is
not an objectivity but is rather
equally liberated into subjectivity
or into the form of simple self-equality;
consequently, the object facing
the concept is the concept itself.
Its reality in general is the form of its existence;
all depends on the determination of this form;
on it rests the difference between
what the concept is in itself, or as subjective,
and what it is when immersed in objectivity,
and then in the idea of life.
In this last, the concept is indeed distinguished
from its external reality and posited for itself;
however, this being-for-itself which it now has,
it has only as an identity that refers to itself
as immersed in the objectivity subjugated to it,
or to itself as indwelling, substantial form.
The elevation of the concept above life consists in this,
that its reality is the concept-form liberated into universality.
Through this judgment the idea is doubled,
into the subjective concept whose reality is the concept itself,
and the objective concept which is as life.
Thought, spirit, self-consciousness, are determinations
of the idea inasmuch as the latter has itself
as the subject matter, and its existence, that is, the determinateness
of its being, is its own difference from itself.

The metaphysics of the spirit or,
as was more commonly said in the past, of the soul,
revolved around the determinations
of substance, simplicity, immateriality.
These were determinations for which
spirit was supposed to be the ground,
but as a subject drawn from empirical consciousness,
and the question then was which predicates
agreed with the perceived facts.
But this was a procedure that could go
no further than the procedure of physics,
which reduces the world of appearance
to general laws and determinations of reflection,
for it is spirit still as phenomenal
that is taken as the foundation.
In fact, in so far as scientific stringency goes,
it also had to fall short of physics.
For not only is spirit infinitely richer than nature;
since its essence is constituted by
the absolute unity in the concept of opposites,
and in its appearance, therefore,
and in its connection with externality,
it exhibits contradiction at its most extreme form,
it must be possible to adduce an experience in support of
each of the opposite determinations of reflection,
or, starting from experiences, to proceed by way
of formal inference to the opposite determinations.
Since the predicates immediately drawn from
the appearances still belong to empirical psychology,
so far as metaphysical consideration goes,
all that is in truth left are
the entirely inadequate determinations of reflection.
In his critique of rational psychology, Kant insists that,
since this metaphysics is supposed to be a rational science,
the least addition of anything drawn from perception
to the universal representation of self-consciousness
would alter it into an empirical science,
thus compromising its rational purity
and its independence from all experience.
Accordingly, all that is left on this view is
the simple representation “I,”
a representation entirely devoid of content,
of which one cannot even say that it is a concept,
but must say that it is a mere consciousness,
one that accompanies every concept.
Now, as Kant argues further, this “I,”
or, if you prefer, this “it” (the thing) that thinks,
takes us no further than the representation
of a transcendental subject of thoughts = x,
a subject which is known only through
the thoughts that are its predicates,
and of which, taken in isolation,
we cannot ever have the least concept.
This “I” has the associated inconvenience that,
as Kant expresses it, in order to judge anything about it,
we must every time already make use of it,
for it is not so much one representation
by which a particular object is distinguished,
as it is rather a form of representation in general,
in so far as representation can be said to be cognition.
Now the paralogism that rational psychology incurs,
as Kant expresses it, consists in this:
that modes of self-consciousness in thinking are
converted into concepts of the understanding,
as if they were the concepts of an object;
that that “I think” is taken to be
a thinking being, a thing-in-itself;
that in this way, because I am present
in consciousness always as a subject,
am indeed as a singular subject,
identical in all the manifoldness of representation,
and distinguishing myself from this manifoldness as external to it,
the illegitimate inference is thereby drawn that I am a substance,
and a qualitatively simple being on top of that,
and a one, and a being that concretely exists
independently of the things of space and time.

I have cited this position in some detail
because one can clearly recognize in it
both the nature of the former metaphysics of the soul
and also, more to the point, of the Critique that put an end to it.
The former was intent on determining the abstract essence of the soul;
it went about this starting from observation,
and then converting the latter's empirical generalizations,
and the determination of purely external reflection
attaching to the singularity of the actual,
into the form of the determinations of essence just cited.
What Kant generally has in mind here is
the state of the metaphysics of his time
which, as a rule, stayed at these one-sided determinations
with no hint of dialectic;
he neither paid attention to, nor examined,
the genuinely speculative ideas of older
philosophers on the concept of spirit.
In his critique of those determinations he then
simply abided by the Humean style of skepticism;
that is to say, he fixes on how the “I” appears in self-consciousness,
but from this “I,” since it is its essence
(the thing in itself) that we want to cognize,
he removes everything empirical;
nothing then remains but this appearance of the “I think”
that accompanies all representations
and of which we do not have the slightest concept.
It must of course be conceded that,
as long as we are not engaged in comprehending
but confine ourselves to a simple, fixed representation or to a name,
we do not have the slightest concept of the “I,”
or of anything whatever, not even of the concept itself.
Peculiar indeed is the thought
(if one can call it a thought at all)
that I must make use of the “I” in order to judge the “I.”
The “I” that makes use of self-consciousness
as a means in order to judge:
this is indeed an x of which,
and also of the relation involved in this “making use,”
we cannot possibly have the slightest concept.
But surely it is laughable to label
the nature of this self-consciousness,
namely that the “I” thinks itself,
that the “I” cannot be thought without the “I” thinking it,
an awkwardness and, as if it were a fallacy, a circle.
The awkwardness, the circle, is in fact the relation
by which the eternal nature of self-consciousness
and of the concept is revealed in
immediate, empirical self-consciousness,
is revealed because self-consciousness is
precisely the existent and therefore
empirically perceivable pure concept;
because it is the absolute self-reference that,
as parting judgment, makes itself into an intended object
and consists in simply making itself thereby into a circle.
This is an awkwardness that a stone does not have.
When it is a matter of thinking or judging,
the stone does not stand in its own way;
it is dispensed from the burden of making
use of itself for the task;
something else outside it must shoulder that effort.

The defect, which these surely barbarous notions place
in the fact that in thinking the “I”
the latter cannot be left out as a subject,
then also appears the other way around,
in that the “I” occurs only as the subject of consciousness,
or in that I can use myself only as a subject,
and no intuition is available by which the “I” would be given as an object;
but the concept of a thing capable of existence only as a subject
does not as yet carry any objective reality with it.
Now if external intuition as determined in
time and space is required for objectivity,
and it is this objectivity that is missed,
it is then clear that by objectivity is meant only sensuous reality.
But to have risen above such a reality is precisely
the condition of thinking and of truth.
Of course, if the “I” is not grasped conceptually
but is taken as a mere representation,
in the way we talk about it in everyday consciousness,
then it is an abstract self-determination,
and not the self-reference that has itself
for its subject matter.
Then it is only one of the extremes,
a one-sided subject without its objectivity;
or else just an object without subjectivity,
which it would be were it not for the awkwardness just touched upon,
namely that the thinking subject will not
be left out of the “I” as object.
But as a matter of fact this awkwardness is
already found in the other determination,
that of the “I” as subject;
the “I” does think something,
whether itself or something else.
This inseparability of the two forms
in which the “I” opposes itself to itself
belongs to the most intimate nature of its concept
and of the concept as such;
it is precisely what Kant wants to keep away
in order to retain what is only a representation
that does not internally differentiate itself
and consequently, of course, is void of concept.
Now this kind of conceptual void may well oppose itself
to the abstract determinations of reflection
or to the categories of the previous metaphysics,
for in one-sidedness it stands at the same level with them,
though these are in fact on a higher level of thought;
but it appears all the more lame and empty
when compared with the profounder ideas
of ancient philosophy concerning
the concept of the soul or of thinking,
as for instance the truly speculative ideas of Aristotle.
If the Kantian philosophy subjected the
categories of reflection to critical investigation,
all the more should it have investigated the abstraction
of the empty “I” that he retained,
the supposed idea of the thing-in-itself.
The experience of the awkwardness complained of is
itself the empirical fact in which
the untruth of that abstraction finds expression.

The Kantian critique of rational psychology
only refers to Mendelssohn's proof of the persistence of the soul,
and I now also cite its refutation of that proof
because of the oddness of what it adduces against it.
Mendelssohn's proof is based on the simplicity of the soul,
by virtue of which it is supposed to be incapable
of alteration in time, of transition into an other.
Qualitative simplicity is in general the
form of abstraction earlier considered;
as qualitative determinateness, it was investigated
in the sphere of being
and it was then proved that the qualitative,
which is as such abstractly self-referring determinateness,
is precisely for that reason dialectical,
mere transition into an other.
In the case of the concept, however, it was shown that,
when considered in connection with persistence,
indestructibility, imperishableness,
it is that which exists for itself,
which is eternal, just because it is
not abstract but concrete simplicity
because it is not a determinateness
that refers to itself abstractly
but is the unity of itself and its other,
and it cannot therefore pass over into this other
as if it thereby altered in it;
it cannot precisely because it is itself the other,
the determinateness, and hence in this
passing over it only comes to itself.
Now the Kantian critique opposes to this
qualitative determination of the unity of the concept
a quantitative one.
As it says, although the soul is not
a manifold of reciprocally external parts
and contains no extensive magnitude,
yet consciousness has a degree,
and the soul, like every concretely existing being,
is an intensive magnitude;
with this magnitude, however, there is posited
the possibility of a transition into nothing through gradual vanishing.
Now what is this refutation but the application to spirit
of a category of being, of intensive magnitude,
a determination that has no truth in itself
but on the contrary is sublated in the concept?

Metaphysics even one that restricted itself
to the fixed concepts of the understanding
without rising to speculation,
to the nature of the concept and of the idea,
did have for its aim the cognition of truth;
it did probe its subject matter to ascertain
whether they were something true or not,
whether substances or phenomena.
The triumph of the Kantian critique
over this metaphysics consists, on the contrary,
in side-lining any investigation
that would have truth for its aim and this aim itself;
it simply does not pose the one question
which is of interest,
namely whether a determinate subject,
in this case the abstract “I” of representation,
has truth in and for itself.
But to stay at appearances
and at the mere representations
of ordinary consciousness is to give up
on the concept and on philosophy.
Anything beyond that is branded
by the Kantian critique as high-flown,
something to which reason has no claim.
As a matter of fact, the concept does fly high,
rising above what has no concept,
and the immediate justification
for going beyond it is, for one thing, the concept itself,
and, for another, on the negative side,
the untruth of appearance and of representation,
and also of such abstractions as the thing-in-itself
and the said “I” which is not supposed to be an object to itself.

In the context of this logical exposition,
it is from the idea of life that
the idea of spirit has emerged,
or what is the same thing, that has demonstrated
itself to be the truth of the idea of life.
As this result, the idea possesses its truth in and for itself,
with which one may then also compare the empirical reality
or the appearance of spirit to see how far it accords with it.
We have seen regarding life that it is the idea,
but at the same time it has shown itself
not to be as yet the true presentation
or the true mode of its existence.
For in life, the reality of the idea is singularity;
universality or the genus is the inwardness.
The truth of life as absolute negative unity consists,
therefore, in this:
to sublate the abstract or, what is the same,
the immediate singularity,
and as identical to be self-identical,
as genus, to be self-equal.
Now this idea is spirit.
In this connection, we may further remark
that spirit is here considered in the form
that pertains to this idea as logical.
For the idea also has other shapes
which we may now mention in passing;
in these it falls to the concrete sciences
of spirit to consider it, namely
as soul, consciousness, and spirit as such.

The name “soul” was used formerly to mean
singular finite spirit in general,
and rational or empirical psychology was
supposed to be synonymous with doctrine of spirit.
The expression, “soul,” evokes an image of it
as if it were a thing like other things.
One enquires regarding its seat,
the spatial location from which its forces operate;
still more, how this thing can be imperishable,
subjected to the conditions of temporality yet exempt
from alteration in it.
The system of monads elevates matter by making all
of it in principle a soul;
on this way of representing it, the soul is an
atom like the atoms of matter;
the atom that rises from a cup of coffee as vapor
is capable in favorable circumstances of developing into a soul;
only the greater obscurity of its ideation distinguishes it
from the kind of thing that is manifestly soul.
The concept that is for itself is
necessarily also in immediate existence;
in this substantial identity with life,
immersed in its externality,
the concept is the subject matter of anthropology.
But even anthropology would find alien a metaphysics
in which this form of immediacy is made into a soul-thing,
into an atom like the atoms of matter.
To anthropology must be left only that obscure region where spirit,
under influences which were once called sidereal and terrestrial,
lives as a natural spirit in sympathy with nature
and has presentiments of the latter's alterations
in dreams and presentiments,
and indwells the brain, the heart, the liver, and so forth.
To the liver, according to Plato,
God gave the gift of prophesy
above which the self-conscious human is exalted,
so that even the irrational part of the soul
would be provided for by his bounty
and made to share in higher things.
To this irrational side belongs further the
behavior of figurative representation,
and of higher spiritual activity in so far
as the latter is subject to the play
of an entirely corporeal constitution,
of external influences and particular circumstances.

This lowest of the concrete shapes
in which spirit is sunk into materiality has
the one immediately superior to it in consciousness.
In this form the free concept,
as the “I” existing for itself,
is withdrawn from objectivity,
but it refers to the latter as its other,
a subject matter that confronts it.
Since spirit is here no longer as soul,
but, in the certainty that it has of itself,
the immediacy of being has for it the significance
rather of a negative, its identity with itself
in the objectivity confronting it is at
the same time still only a reflective shining,
for that objectivity still also has the
form of a being that exists in itself.
This stage is the subject matter
of the phenomenology of spirit,
a science that stands midway between the science
of the natural spirit and of the spirit as such.
It considers spirit as it exists for itself,
but at the same time as referring to its other,
an other which, as we have just said, is
thereby determined both as an object
existing in itself and as a negative.
The science thus considers spirit as appearing,
as exhibiting itself in its contrary.

But the higher truth of this form is spirit for itself.
For this spirit, the subject matter which for consciousness
exists in itself has the form of its own determination,
the form of representation in general;
this spirit, which acts on the subject matter's determinations
as on its own, on feelings, on representations and thought,
is thus infinite in itself and in its form.
The consideration of this stage belongs
to the doctrine of spirit proper,
which would embrace the subject matter
of ordinary empirical psychology
but which, in order to be the science of spirit,
must not go about its work empirically
but must be conceived scientifically.
At this stage spirit is finite spirit in so far as
the content of its determinateness is an immediately given content;
the science of this finite spirit has
to display the course along which
it liberates itself from this determinateness
and goes on to grasp its truth, the infinite spirit.

The idea of spirit which is the subject matter of logic
already stands, on the contrary, inside pure science;
it has no need, therefore, to observe spirit's
tracing that course, to see how it gets entangled
with nature, with immediate determinateness, with matter,
or in other words with pictorial representation;
this is what the other three sciences investigate.
The idea of spirit has this course already behind it,
or what is the same, it has it rather ahead of it
behind in so far as logic is taken as the final science;
ahead in so far as it is taken as the first science
from which the idea first passes over into nature.
In the logical idea of spirit, therefore,
the “I” is from the start in the way it has emerged
from the concept of nature as the truth of nature,
the free concept which in its judgment is itself the subject matter
confronting it, the concept as its idea.
Also in this shape, however, the idea is still not consummated.

Although the idea is indeed the free concept
that has itself as its subject matter,
it is nonetheless immediate,
and just because it is immediate,
it is still the idea in its subjectivity,
and hence in its finitude in general.
It is the purpose that ought to realize itself,
or the absolute idea itself still in its appearance.
What the idea seeks is the truth,
this identity of the concept itself and reality;
but at first it only seeks it;
for it is here as it is at first,
still something subjective.
Consequently, although the subject matter
that is for the concept is here also a given subject matter,
it does not enter into the subject as affecting it,
or as confronting it with a constitution of its own
as subject matter, or as a pictorial representation;
on the contrary, the subject transforms it
into a conceptual determination;
it is the concept which is the active principle in it
which therein refers itself to itself,
and, by thus giving itself its reality in the object, finds truth.

Initially, therefore, the idea is one extreme of a syllogism,
the concept that as purpose has itself
at first for its subjective reality;
the other extreme is the restriction
of the subjective, the objective world.
The two extremes are identical in that they are the idea.
Their unity is, first, that of the concept,
a unity which in the one extreme is only for itself
and in the other only in itself.
Second, it is reality, abstract in the one extreme
and in the other in its concrete externality.
This unity is now posited through cognition,
and, because the latter is the subjective idea
which as purpose proceeds from itself,
it is at first only a middle term.
The knowing subject, through the
determinateness of its concept
which is the abstract being-for-itself,
refers to an external world;
nevertheless, it does this in
the absolute certainty of itself,
in order to elevate its implicit reality,
this formal truth, to real truth.
It has the entire essentiality of
the objective world in its concept;
its process consists in positing for itself
the concrete reality of that world
as identical with the concept,
and conversely in positing the latter
as identical with objectivity.

Immediately, the idea of appearance is
the theoretical idea, cognition as such.
For to the concept that exists for itself,
the objective world immediately has
the form of immediacy or of being,
just as that concept is to itself
at first only the abstract concept of itself,
is still shut up within itself.
The concept is therefore only as form,
of which only its simple determinations
of universality and particularity are
the reality that it possesses within,
while the singularity or the determinate determinateness,
the content, is received by it from the outside.

