
A. THE MECHANICAL OBJECT

The object is, as we have seen, the syllogism
whose mediation has attained equilibrium
and has therefore come to be immediate identity.
It is therefore in and for itself a universal: universality,
not in the sense of a commonality of properties,
but a universality that pervades particularity
and in it is immediate singularity.

1. To begin with, therefore,
the object does not differentiate
itself into matter and form,
matter being its presumed self-subsistent universal aspect
and form the particular and singular instead;
according to its concept, any such abstract differentiation of
singularity and universality has no place in the object;
if regarded as matter, the object must then be taken
to be in itself informed matter.
One can just as well take it as a thing with properties,
as a whole consisting of parts, as substance with accidents,
or as determined by the other relations of reflection.
But these are all past relations that
in the concept have come to an end.
The object, therefore, has neither properties nor accidents,
for these are separable from the thing or the substance,
whereas in the object particularity is
absolutely reflected into the totality.
In the parts of a whole,
there is indeed present that self-subsistence that
pertains to the differences of the object,
but these differences are at once themselves essentially objects,
totalities which, unlike parts, are not such as against the whole.

At first, therefore, the object is indeterminate,
for it has no determinate opposition within,
because it is the mediation
that has collapsed into immediate identity.
Inasmuch as the concept is essentially determined,
the object has in it the determinateness of a manifold
which, although complete, is otherwise
indeterminate, that is, relationless,
one that constitutes a totality
also not further determined at first;
sides or parts that may be distinguished
within it belong to an external reflection.
This totally indeterminate difference thus amounts just to this,
that there are several objects,
each of which only contains its determinateness
reflected into its universality
and does not reflectively shine outwardly.
Because this indeterminate determinateness is
essential to the object,
the object is in itself a plurality,
and must therefore be regarded as a composite, an aggregate.
Yet it does not consist of atoms, for atoms are not objects
because they are not totalities.
Leibniz's monad would be more of an object.
It is a total representation of the world
which, shut up within its intensive subjectivity,
in essence at least is supposed to be a one.
Yet the monad, determined as an exclusive one,
is a principle only assumed by reflection.
It is an object, however, both because
the ground of its manifold representations of the developed,
that is, the posited determinations of
its merely implicit totality, lies outside it,
and because it is equally a matter of indifference
for the monad that it constitutes an object
together with other objects;
in fact, therefore, it is not exclusive,
not self-determined for itself.

2. Since the object is now
a totality of determinateness, yet,
because of its indeterminateness and immediacy,
it is not the totality's negative unity,
it is indifferent towards the determinations as singulars,
determined in and for themselves,
just as these are themselves indifferent to each other.
These, therefore, are not comprehensible from it nor from one another;
the object's totality is the form of the overall reflectedness
of its manifoldness into a singularity in general
which is not in itself determinate.
The determinacies, therefore, which are in it do indeed pertain to it;
but the form that constitutes their difference
and combines them into a unity is an external one,
indifferent to them;
whether it be a mixture, or again an order,
a certain arrangement of parts and sides,
these are combinations that are indifferent to what they connect.

Consequently, like an existence in general,
the object has the determinateness of its totality outside it,
in other objects, and these again outside them,
and so forth to infinity.
The immanent turning back of this progression in infinitum
must indeed be likewise assumed,
and it must be represented as a totality, as a world,
but one which is nothing but a universality brought to closure
through a singularity that remains indeterminate,
a universe.

Since the object is thus determinate
yet indifferent to its determinateness,
through itself it points for its determinateness
outside and beyond itself,
constantly to objects for which it is however
likewise a matter of indifference
that they do the determining.
Consequently, nowhere is
a principle of self-determination to be found.
Determinism, which is the standpoint that cognition adopts
when it assumes as truth the object as we first have it here,
assigns for each determination of the object that of another object;
but this other object is likewise indifferent
both to its determinateness and its determining.
For this reason determinism is itself so indeterminate
as to be bound to an infinite progression;
it can halt at will anywhere, and be satisfied there,
because the object to which it has progressed,
being a formal totality, is shut up within itself
and indifferent to its being determined by another.
For this reason to explain the determination of an object,
and to this end to extend the representation of it beyond it,
is only an empty word,
for there is no self-determination
in the other object to which
the explanation has been extended.

3. Now since the determinateness of an object lies in an other,
there is no determinate diversity separating the two;
the determinateness is merely doubled,
once in the one object and then again in the other;
it is something utterly identical
and the explanation or comprehension is,
therefore, a tautology.
This tautology is an external back and forth movement;
since the determinateness fails to obtain from objects
that are indifferent to it any proper differentiation
and is therefore only identical,
there is only one determinateness at hand,
and that it should be doubled only expresses
precisely the externality and vacuity of a difference.
But the objects are at the same time
self-subsistent in regard to one another;
in that identity, therefore, they remain utterly external.
Thus there arises the contradiction of
a perfect indifference of objects to one another
and of an identity of determinateness of such objects,
or of the objects' perfect externality
in the identity of their determinateness.
This contradiction is consequently the
negative unity of a plurality of objects
reciprocally repelling each other in the unity.
This is the mechanical process.
