
A. THE SUBJECTIVE PURPOSE

In the centrality of the objective sphere,
which is an indifference to determinateness,
the subjective concept has first rediscovered
and posited the negative point of unity,
and in chemism it has first rediscovered
and posited the objectivity of the determinations
of the concept by which it is first posited
as concrete objective concept.
Its determinateness or its simple difference now
has the determinateness of externality within it,
and its simple unity is therefore
the unity that repels itself from itself
and in this repelling maintains itself.
Purpose, therefore, is the subjective concept as
an essential striving and impulse
to posit itself externally.
In this, it is exempt from transition.
It is neither a force expressing itself,
nor a substance or a cause manifesting
itself in its accidents or effects.
To the extent that force has not expressed
itself, it is only an abstract inner;
or again, it first has existence in
an externalization to which it has to be solicited.
The same applies to cause and to substance.
Since they have actuality only in
the accidents and in the effects,
their activity is a transition against which
they do not maintain themselves in freedom.
Purpose can of course also be
defined as a force or a cause,
but these expressions cover only
an incomplete side of its signification;
if they are to be said of purpose according to its truth,
this can be done only in a way that sublates their concept,
as a cause that solicits itself to expression,
or a cause that is a cause of itself
or whose effect is immediately the cause.
When purposiveness is attributed to
an intelligence, as was said above,
this is done with specific reference
to a certain content.
But, as such, purpose is to be taken as
the rational in its concrete existence.
It manifests rationality by being
the concrete concept that holds
the objective difference in its absolute unity.
Within, therefore, it is essentially syllogism.
It is the self-equal universal;
more precisely, inasmuch as it contains
self-repelling negativity,
it is universal though at first
still indeterminate activity.
But since this activity is negative self-reference,
it determines itself immediately and
gives itself the moment of particularity,
and this particularity,
as likewise the totality of the form reflected into itself,
is content as against the posited differences of the form.
The same negativity, through its self-reference,
is just as immediately the reflection of the form
into itself and singularity.
From the one side, this reflection is
the inner universality of the subject;
from the other side, however,
it is outwards reflection;
and to this extent purpose is
still something subjective,
its activity still directed to
an external objectivity.

For purpose is the concept that
has come to itself in objectivity;
the determinateness that it has given itself
there is that of objective indifference
and externality of determinateness;
its self-repelling negativity is
therefore one whose moments,
being only determinations of the concept itself,
also have the form of objective indifference to one another.
Already in the formal judgment are subject and predicate
determined as self-subsistent over against each other;
but their self-subsistence is still only abstract universality.
It has now attained the determination of objectivity,
but, as a moment of the concept,
this complete difference is
enclosed within the simple unity of the concept.
Now in so far as purpose is this total reflection of
objectivity into itself
and is such immediately,
in the first place,
the self-determination
or the particularity as
simple reflection into itself is
distinguished from the concrete form,
and is a determinate content.
Accordingly, purpose is finite,
even though according to form
it is equally infinite subjectivity.
Secondly, since its determinateness has
the form of objective indifference,
it has the shape of a presupposition,
and from this side its finitude consists
in its having before it an objective,
mechanical and chemical world to which
its activity is directed
as to something already there;
its self-determining activity is in its identity
thus immediately external to itself,
reflection into itself just as much as reflection outwards.
To this extent purpose still has a truly
extra-mundane concrete existence;
to the extent, namely, that this objectivity stands opposed to it,
just as the latter, as a mechanical and chemical whole
still not determined and not pervaded by purpose,
stands on its side opposed to it.

Consequently, the movement of purpose can now be expressed
as being directed at sublating its presupposition,
that is, the immediacy of the object,
and at positing it as determined by the concept.
This negative relating to the object is
equally a negative attitude towards itself,
a sublating of the subjectivity of purpose.
Positively, this is the realization of purpose,
namely the unification of the objective being with it,
so that this being, which as a moment of purpose is
immediately the determinateness identical with it,
shall be as external determinateness,
and conversely the objective, as presupposition,
shall be posited rather as determined by the concept.

Purpose is in it the impulse to its realization;
the determinateness of the moments
of the concept is externality;
the simplicity of these moments
within the unity of the concept is
however incommensurable with what this unity is,
and the concept therefore repels itself from itself.
This repulsion is in general the resolution of
the self-reference of the negative unity
by virtue of which the latter is exclusive singularity;
but by this excluding the unity resolves itself,
that is to say, it discloses itself,
for it is self-determination,
the positing of itself.
On the one hand, in determining itself,
subjectivity makes itself into particularity,
gives itself a content which,
enclosed within the unity of the concept,
is still an inner content;
but this positing, the simple reflection into itself,
is, as we have seen, at the same time
immediately a presupposing;
and at the same moment in which
the subject of purpose determines itself,
it is referred to an indifferent, external objectivity
which is to be made equal by it
with the determinateness of that inner content,
that is to say, posited as something determined by the concept,
first of all as means
