
B. THE RELATION OF FORCE AND ITS EXPRESSION

Force is the negative unity into which
the contradiction of whole and parts has resolved itself;
it is the truth of that first relation.
That of whole and parts is the thoughtless relation
which the understanding first happens to come up with;
or, objectively speaking, it is a dead mechanical aggregate
that indeed has form determinations
and brings the manifoldness of
its self-subsisting matter together into one unity;
but this unity is external to the manifoldness.
But the relation of force is the higher immanent turning back
in which the unity of the whole that made up the connection
of the self-subsisting otherness ceases to be something external
and indifferent to this manifoldness.

In the essential relation as now determined,
the immediate and the reflected self-subsistence are
now posited in that manifoldness as sublated or as moments,
whereas in the preceding relation they were self-subsisting
sides or extremes.

In this there is contained,
first, that the reflected unity
and its immediate existence,
in so far as they are both first and immediate,
sublate themselves and pass over into their other:
the former, force, passes over into its expression,
and what is expressed is a disappearing something
that returns into force as its ground
and only exists as supported and posited by it.

Second, this transition is not only
a becoming and a disappearing
but is rather negative reference to itself;
that is, that which alters its determination is
in this altering reflected-into-itself and preserves itself;
the movement of force is not
as much a transition as a translation,
and in this alteration posited through itself
it remains what it is.

Third, this reflected, self-referring unity is
itself also sublated and a moment;
it is mediated through its other
and it has this as condition;
its negative self-reference,
which is a first
and begins the movement of
the transition out of itself,
has equally a presupposition
by which it is solicited,
and an other from which it begins.

a. The conditionedness of force

Considered in its closer determinations,
force contains, first, the moment of existing immediacy;
it itself is determined over against this immediacy
as negative unity.
But this unity,
in the determination of immediate being,
is an existing something.
This something appears as a first,
since as an immediate
it is negative unity;
force, on the contrary,
since it is a reflected something,
appears as positedness
and to this extent as pertaining to
the existing thing or to a matter.
Not that force is the form of this thing
and the thing is determined by it;
on the contrary, the thing is as
an immediate indifferent to it.
As so determined, there is no ground in
the thing for having a force;
force, on the other hand,
since it is the side of positedness,
presupposes the thing essentially.
If it is therefore asked,
how the thing or matter happens to have a force,
the latter appears as externally connected to it
and impressed upon the thing by some alien power.

As this immediate subsistence,
force is a quiescent determinateness of
the thing in general;
not anything that expresses itself
but something immediately external.
Hence force is also designated as matter,
and instead of a magnetic force,
and an electric force,
and other such forces,
a magnetic matter,
an electric matter,
and so on, are assumed;
or again, instead of
the renowned force of attraction,
a fine ether is assumed
that holds everything together.
These are the matters,
which we considered above,
into which the inert, powerless
negative unity of the thing dissolved itself.
But force contains immediate
concrete existence as a moment,
one which, though a condition,
is transient and self-sublating;
it contains it, therefore,
not as a concretely existing thing.
Further, it is not negation as determinateness,
but negative unity reflected into itself.
Consequently, the thing where the force was
supposed to be no longer has any significance here;
the force itself is rather
the positing of the externality
that appears as concrete existence.
It also no longer is, therefore,
merely a determinate matter;
such self-subsistence has long since passed over
into positedness and appearance.

Second, force is the unity of
reflected and immediate subsistence,
or of form-unity and external self-subsistence.
It is both in one;
it is the contact of sides of
which one is in so far as the other is not,
self-identical positive reflection and negated reflection.
Force is thus self-repelling contradiction;
it is active;
or it is self-referring negative unity
in which the reflected immediacy
or the essential in-itselfness is
posited as being only as sublated or as a moment,
and consequently, in so far as it distinguishes itself
from immediate concrete existence,
as passing over into it.
Force, as the determination of
the reflected unity of the whole,
is thus posited as  becoming
concretely existent external manifoldness
from out of itself.

But, third, force is activity at first only
in principle and immediately;
it is reflected unity,
and just as essentially the negation of it;
inasmuch as it differs from this unity,
but is only the identity of itself and its negation,
it essentially refers to this identity as
an immediacy external to it
and one which it has as
presupposition and condition.

Now this presupposition is not
a thing standing over against it;
in force any such indifferent
self-subsistence is sublated;
as the condition of force,
the thing is a self-subsistent other to it.
But because it is not a thing,
and the self-subsistent immediacy has
on the contrary attained here the
determination of self-referring negative unity,
the self-subsistent other is itself a force.
The activity of force is conditioned
through itself as through an other to itself,
through a force.

Accordingly, force is a relation
in which each side is the same as the other.
They are forces that stand in relation,
and refer to each other essentially.
Further, they are different at first only in general;
the unity of their relation
is at first one which is internal and exists only implicitly.
The conditionedness of a force through another force is
thus the doing of the force itself in itself;
that is, the force is at first a positing act as pre-supposing,
an act that only negatively refers to itself;
the other force still lies beyond its positing activity,
namely the reflection that in its determining
immediately returns into itself.

b. The solicitation of force

Force is conditioned because
the moment of immediate concrete existence
which it contains is something only posited,
but, because it is at the same time an immediate,
is posited as something presupposed in which
the force negates itself.
Accordingly, the externality
which is present to force is its
own activity of presupposing posited
at first as another force.
This presupposing is moreover reciprocal.
Each of the two forces contains the unity
reflected into itself as sublated
and is therefore a presupposing;
it posits itself as external;
this moment of externality is its own;
but since it is equally a unity reflected into itself,
it posits that externality at the same time
not within itself but as another force.

But the external as such is self-sublating;
further, the activity that reflects
itself into itself essentially refers to
that externality as to its other,
but equally to it as to something
which is null in itself and identical with it.
Since the presupposing activity is
equally immanent reflection,
it sublates that external negation,
and posits it as something external to it,
or as its externality.
Thus force, as conditioning,
is reciprocally a stimulus for the other force
against which it is active.
The attitude of each force is not one
of passive determination,
as if something other than it were
thereby being elicited in it;
the stimulus rather only solicits it.
The force is within it the negativity of itself,
the repelling of itself from itself is its own positing.
Its act, therefore, consists in sublating
the externality of the stimulus,
reducing it to just a stimulus
and positing it as its own repelling
of itself from itself,
as its own expression.

The force that expresses itself is thus
the same as what was at first a presupposing activity,
that is, one which makes itself external;
but, as self-expressive,
force also negates externality
and posits it as its own activity.
Now in so far as in this examination
we start from force as the negative unity of itself,
and consequently as presupposing reflection,
this is the same as when,
in the expression of force,
we start from the soliciting stimulus.
Thus force is in its concept at first
determined as self-sublating identity,
and in its reality one of the two forces
is determined as soliciting
and the other as being solicited.
But the concept of force is as such
the identity of positing and presupposing reflection,
or of reflected and immediate unity,
and each of these determinations is simply a moment, in unity,
and consequently is as mediated through the other.
But, equally so, there is nothing in the two forces
thus alternately referring to each other that determines
which would be the soliciting and which the solicited,
or rather, both of these form determinations
belong to each in equal manner.
And this identity is not just one of
external comparison but an essential unity of the two.
Thus one force is determined first as soliciting
and the other as being solicited;
these determinations of form appear in this guise as two differences
present in the forces immediately.
But they are essentially mediated.
The one force is solicited;
this stimulus is a determination posited in it from outside.
But the force is itself a presupposing;
it essentially reflects into itself
and sublates the fact that
the stimulus is something external.
That it is solicited is thus its own doing,
or, it is through its own determining
that the other force is an other force in general
and the one soliciting.
The soliciting force refers to the other negatively
and so sublates its externality and is positing;
but it is this positing only on the presupposition
that it has an other over against it;
that is to say, it is itself soliciting only to
the extent that it has an externality in it,
and hence to the extent that it is solicited.
Or it is soliciting only to the extent that
it is solicited to be soliciting.
And so, conversely, the first is solicited only
to the extent that it itself solicits
the other to solicit it, that is, the first force.
Each thus receives the stimulus from the other;
but the stimulus that each delivers as
active consists in receiving
a stimulus from the other;
the stimulus which it receives is solicited by itself.
Both, the given and the received stimulus,
or the active expression and the passive externality,
are each, therefore, nothing immediate but are mediated:
indeed, each force is itself the determinateness
which the other has over against it,
is mediated through this other,
and this mediating other is again
its own determining positing.

This then that a force happens to incur
a stimulus through another force;
that it therefore behaves passively
but then again passes over from
this passivity into activity,
this is the turning back of force into itself.
Force expresses itself.
The external expression is a reaction
in the sense that it posits
the externality as its own moment
and thus sublates its having been
solicited through an other force.
The two are therefore one:
the expression of the force
by virtue of which the latter,
through its negative activity
which is directed at itself,
imparts a determinate being-for-other to itself;
and the infinite turning in
this externality back to itself,
so that there it only refers to itself.
The presupposing reflection,
to which belong the conditionedness and the stimulus,
is therefore immediately also the reflection
that returns into itself,
and the activity is essentially reactive,
against itself.
The positing of the stimulus
or the external is itself
the sublation of it,
and, conversely, the sublation of the stimulus is
the positing of the externality.

c. The infinity of force

Force is finite inasmuch as its moments
still have the form of immediacy.
In this determination its presupposing
and its self-referring reflection are different:
the one appears as an external self-subsisting force
and the other as passively referring to it.
Force is thus still conditioned according to form,
and according to content likewise still restricted,
for a determinateness of form still entails a restriction of content.
But the activity of force consists in expressing itself;
that is, as we have seen, in sublating the externality and
determining it as that in which
it is identical with itself.
What force truly expresses, therefore,
is that its reference to an other
is its reference to itself;
that its passivity consists in its activity.
The stimulus by virtue of which
it is solicited to activity is its own soliciting;
the externality that comes to it is nothing immediate
but something mediated by it,
just as its own essential
self-identity is not immediate
but is mediated by virtue of its negation.
In brief, force expresses this,
that its externality is identical with its inwardness.
