
C. QUANTITATIVE INFINITY

a. Its concept

Quantum alters and becomes another quantum;
the further determination of this alteration,
that it goes on to infinity,
lies in that it is positioned as
inherently self-contradictory.
Quantum becomes an other;
but it continues in its otherness;
the other is therefore also a quantum.
This latter, however, is the other,
not of a quantum, but of the quantum as such,
the negative of itself as a limited something,
and hence its own unlimitedness, infinity.
Quantum is an ought; it implies that it be determined-for-itself,
and this being-determined-for-itself is rather
the being determined in an other;
and, conversely, it is the being-determined in
an other as sublated, is indifferent subsisting-for-itself.

In this way, finitude and infinity each at once acquires
within it a double though opposite meaning.
Quantum is finite, first, as limited in general;
second, as sending itself beyond itself,
as being-determined in an other.
On the other hand, its infinity, is,
first, the unlimitedness of quantum;
second, its being-turned-back-into-itself,
the indifferent being-for-itself.
If we now compare these moments with each other,
we find that the determination of quantum's finitude,
its sending itself beyond itself into an other
that constitutes its determination,
is equally the determination of the infinite;
the negation of limit is this
same transcendence of determinateness,
so that in this negation, in the infinite,
quantum has its final determinateness.
The other moment of infinity is the for-itself
which is indifferent to the limit;
but the quantum itself is so limited,
as to be indifferent with respect to its limit,
and hence with respect to other quanta and its “beyond.”
In quantum, finitude and infinity
(the latter supposedly separate from finitude, as bad infinity)
each already possesses within it the moment of the other.

The qualitative and quantitative infinite are distinguished
inasmuch as in the former the opposition of
the finite and infinite is qualitative,
and the transition of the finite into the infinite,
or the reference of each to the other,
is present only in the in-itself, in their concept.
Qualitative determinateness is immediate;
it refers to otherness essentially as to
a being which is other than it;
it is not posited as having its negation, its other, in it.
By contrast, magnitude is as such sublated determinateness;
it is posited as being unlike and indifferent to itself,
and hence as something alterable.
The qualitative finite and infinite, therefore,
stand opposed to each other absolutely,
that is, abstractly;
their unity is the inner connection underlying them;
hence the finite continues in its other
only in itself, not in it.
By contrast, in the infinite in which
the quantitative finite has its absolute determinateness,
this finite refers to itself in it.
This, their mutual reference, is first displayed
in the quantitatively infinite process.

b. The quantitative infinite process

The process to infinity is in general the expression of contradiction,
here, of the contradiction contained in the quantitative finite
or in quantum in general.
It is the reciprocal determination of the finite and the infinite
that came up for consideration in the sphere of the qualitative,
with the difference that, as just indicated,
in the sphere of quantity the limit inherently
sends itself beyond itself and continues there,
and hence, conversely, the quantitative infinite is
also posited as having the quantum in it,
for in its externality quantum is itself;
its externality belongs to its determination.

The infinite progress is now
the expression of this contradiction,
not the resolution of it;
however, because of the continuity of
one determinateness in the other,
the progress gives rise to the semblance of
a resolution in a union of the two.
As at first posited, such a progress is
the task of attaining the infinite
but not the attainment of it;
it is a perpetual generation of the infinite,
without the progress of ever
getting  beyond the quantum itself,
and without the infinite ever becoming
something which is positively present.
It belongs to the concept of quantum
to have a beyond of itself.
This beyond is, first, the abstract moment
of the non-being of quantum;
this resolves itself in it;
it thus refers to its beyond as to its infinity in accordance
with the qualitative moment of the opposition.
But, second, quantum is continuous with this beyond;
it consists precisely in being the other of itself,
external to itself;
this externality equally is, therefore,
no more an other than the quantum;
the beyond or the infinite is thus itself a quantum.
The beyond is thus recalled from its flight
and the infinite is attained.
But because the infinite, now become a “this-side,”
is again a quantum,
what is posited is again only a new limit;
this limit, as quantum, has also fled again from itself,
is as such beyond itself,
and has repelled itself from itself
into its non-being, into its beyond,
and as the quantum repels itself into the beyond,
so does the beyond perpetually become a quantum.

The continuity of quantum with its other brings about
the conjunction of the two in the expression
of an infinitely great or infinitely small.
Since they both still have in them the determination of quantum,
they remain alterable and the absolute determinateness
which would be a being-for-itself is thus not attained.
This being-outside-itself of the determination is in the double infinity
(posited in the relative opposition of the “more” and the “less”)
of the infinitely great and the infinitely small.
In each, the quantum is maintained in perpetual opposition to its beyond.
No matter how much the “great” is enlarged, it shrinks to insignificance;
since it refers to the infinite as to its non-being,
the opposition is qualitative;
the enlarged quantum has gained nothing, therefore, from the infinite;
the latter is its nothing now just as before.
Or again, the increase in the quantum is not
an approximation to the infinite,
for the distinction between the quantum and its infinity
essentially has also the moment of being non-quantitative.
This moment is only the sharpened expression of the contradiction
that the quantum ought to be something great,
that is, a quantum, and non-finite, that is, not a quantum.
Equally, the infinitely small is, as something small,
a quantum and therefore remains absolutely, that is, qualitatively,
too great for the infinite and opposed to it.
In both, there remains the contradiction of the infinite progress
which in them should have reached its goal.

This infinity, which persists in the determination
of the beyond of the finite,
is to be characterized as the bad quantitative infinity.
Like the qualitatively bad infinity,
it is the perpetual movement back and forth
from one side of the persistent contradiction to the other,
from the limit to its non-being,
and from the latter back again to the other, the limit.
To be sure, the term to which the advance is made
in the quantitative progress is not an abstract “other” in general
but a quantum which is explicitly posited as different;
but this quantum remains opposed to its negation in the same way.
Also the progress, therefore, is neither an advance nor a gain
but rather a repetition of one and the same move, a positing, a sublating,
and then again a positing and a sublating:
an impotence of the negative to which what it sublates
continuously comes back by its very sublation of it.
The two, the positing and the sublation,
are so bonded to each other that
they absolutely flee from each other
and yet, in thus fleeing, they are unable to part
but rather become bonded in their very flight from each other.

c. The infinity of quantum

The infinite quantum as infinitely great or infinitely small is
itself, in itself, the infinite progress;
as great or small it is a quantum
and at the same time the non-being of quantum.
The infinitely great and the infinitely small are,
therefore, figurative representations
which on closer inspection prove to be
but unsubstantial nebulous shadows.
In the infinite progress, however,
this contradiction is explicitly present
and with it that which constitutes the nature of quantum
which, as intensive magnitude, has attained its reality
and is now posited in its existence as it is in its concept.
We must now consider this identity.

Quantum is as degree simple, self-referred, and determined within it.
Because the otherness and the determinateness are sublated
in it through this simplicity, the determinateness is external to it;
it has its determinateness outside it.
This, its being-outside-itself,
is at first the abstract non-being
of quantum in general, the bad infinity.
But further, this non-being is also a magnitude;
quantum continues in its non-being,
for it is precisely in its externality
that it has its determinateness,
and this, its externality, is
itself therefore equally a quantum;
the non-being of quantum, the infinity,
is thus limited, that is, this beyond is sublated,
is itself determined as a quantum
which, consequently, in its negation is with itself.

But this is what quantum as such is in itself.
For through its externality it is precisely itself;
the externality constitutes that
in virtue of which quantum is quantum,
where it is with itself.
In the infinite progress, therefore,
the concept of quantum is posited.

If we now first look at this progress
in its abstract determinations as
they are displayed before us,
what we find in it is the sublating of quantum,
but no less also of its beyond;
what we find, therefore, is the negation of
quantum as well as the negation of this negation.
Its truth is the unity of these two negations
in which the negations are, but as moments.
This unity is the resolution of the contradiction
of which the infinite progress is the expression;
its most immediate meaning, therefore, is that
of the restoration of the concept of magnitude,
of being an indifferent or external limit.
On the subject of the infinite progress as such,
the only reflection which is usually made is
that each quantum, however great or small, can disappear,
that it must be possible to transcend it;
not, however, that this sublating of the quantum,
the beyond, the bad infinite itself, also disappears.

Even the first sublating, the negation of quality as such
whereby the quantum is posited,
is in itself the sublation of negation;
quantum is sublated qualitative limit,
consequently sublated negation
but it is at the same time only in itself;
the sublating is posited as an existence,
and its negation is then fixed as the infinite,
as the side beyond quantum,
while the latter remains on its side as an immediate;
thus the infinite is determined only as first negation
and it is in this way that it appears in the infinite progress.
But there is more to it, as has just been shown:
there is the negation of negation
or what the infinite is in truth.
And this we have just seen with
the restoration of the concept of quantum.
Such a restoration means, in the first place,
that to the existence of the quantum
there has accrued a more precise determination.
What we now have is quantum determined
according to its concept,
and this quantum is different from the immediate quantum:
externality is now the opposite of itself,
is posited as a moment of magnitude;
quantum, for its part, is posited as
having its determinateness in another quantum,
through the intermediary of its non-being,
of infinity, that is, that it is qualitatively what it is.
Yet this comparison of the concept of quantum
with its existence belongs more to our reflection,
to a relation which is not yet present here.
The next determination, rather, which is present here is
that quantum has returned to quality, is from now on
qualitatively determined.
For its defining property, its quality, is externality,
the indifference of the determinateness;
and quantum is now posited rather
as being itself in its externality,
of referring to itself therein,
of being in simple unity with itself,
that is, of being qualitatively determined.
This qualitative being is still more closely determined,
namely as being-for-itself;
for the very self-reference
which quantum has attained
has proceeded from mediation,
from the negation of the negation.
Quantum no longer has infinity,
the being-determined-for-itself,
outside it, but in it.

The infinite, which in the infinite progress only has
the empty meaning of a non-being,
of an unattained but sought beyond,
is in fact nothing other than quality.
Quantum, as indifferent limit, surpasses itself into the infinite;
it thereby seeks nothing else than its being-determined-for-itself,
the qualitative moment which, however, is only an ought.
Its indifference towards the limit,
and hence its lack of a determinateness
which is an existent-for-itself, its surpassing itself,
is that which makes the quantum what it is.
This, its surpassing, is to be negated
and quantum is to find in infinity its absolute determinateness.

Quite generally: quantum is sublated quality;
but quantum is infinite, it surpasses itself,
is the negation of itself;
this, its surpassing, is therefore in itself
the negation of the negated quality,
the restoration of it;
and what is posited is that the externality,
which seemed to be a beyond,
is determined as quantum's own moment.

Quantum is thus posited as repelled from itself,
and with that there are two quanta which are however sublated,
only moments of one unity,
and this unity is the determinateness of quantum.
Quantum, self-referred as
indifferent limit and hence qualitatively posited,
is the quantitative relation or ratio.
In ratio quantum is external to itself, different from itself;
this, its externality, is the reference
connecting a quantum to another quantum,
each quantum acquiring value only
in this connection with its other;
and this reference constitutes the determinateness
of the quantum which is this unity.
In this unity quantum possesses not an indifferent
but a qualitative determination;
in this its externality has turned back into itself;
it is in it what it is.
