
A. NUMBER

Quantity is quantum, or has a limit,
both as continuous and discrete magnitude.
The distinction between these two species has here,
in the first instance, no significance.

As the sublated being-for-itself,
quantity is already in and for itself
indifferent to its limit.
But, equally, the limit or to be a quantum is
not thereby indifferent to quantity;
for quantity contains within itself as its own moment
the absolute determinateness of the one,
and this moment, posited in the continuity
or unity of quantity, is its limit,
but a limit which remains as the one
that quantity in general has become.

This one is therefore the principle of quantum,
but as the one of quantity.
For this reason it is,
first, continuous, it is a unity;
second, it is discrete, a plurality
(implicit in continuous magnitude
or posited in discrete magnitude)
of ones that have equality with one another,
the said continuity, the same unity.
Third, this one is also the negation of
the many ones as a simple limit,
an excluding of its otherness from itself,
a determination of itself in opposition to other quanta.
The one is thus
(a) self-referring,
(b) enclosing, and
(c) other-excluding limit.

Thus completely posited in these determinations,
quantum is number.
The complete positedness lies in
the existence of the limit as a plurality
and so in its being distinguished from the unity.
Number appears for this reason as a discrete magnitude,
but in unity it has continuity as well.
It is, therefore, also quantum in complete determinateness,
for in it the limit is the determinate plurality
that has the one, the absolutely determined, for its principle.
Continuity, in which the one is only implicitly present
as a sublated moment [posited as unity] is
the form of the indeterminateness.

Quantum, only as such, is limited in general;
its limit is its abstract, simple determinateness.
But as number, this limit is posited as in itself manifold.
It contains the many ones that make up its existence,
but does not contain them in an indeterminate manner,
for the determinateness of the limit falls rather in it;
the limit excludes the existence of other ones,
that is, of other pluralities,
and those which it encloses are a determinate aggregate:
they are the amount or the how many times with respect to which,
taken as discreteness in the way it is in number,
the other is the unit, the continuity of the amount.
Amount and unit constitute the moments of number.

Regarding amount, we must examine yet more closely
how the many ones in which it consists are in the limit.
It is rightly said of amount that it consists of the many,
for the ones are not in it as sublated but are rather present in it,
only posited with the excluding limit
to which they are indifferent.
But the limit is not indifferent to them.
In the sphere of existence, the limit was
at first so placed in relation to existence
that the latter was left on this side of its limit,
standing there as the affirmative,
while the limit, the negation,
stood outside on the border of existence;
similarly, with respect to the many ones,
their being truncated and the exclusion of the remaining ones
appears in them as a determination
that falls outside the enclosed ones.
But it was found in that sphere of existence
that the limit pervades existence,
that it extends so far as existence does,
and that the something is for this reason
limited by its very determination, that is, is finite.
Now, in the quantitative sphere, a number, say a hundred,
is so represented that only the hundredth unit brings to the many
the limit that makes them a hundred.
In one respect this is correct;
but, in another respect, none of the ones in the hundred
has precedence over any other, for they are only equal;
each is just as much the hundredth;
they all thus belong to the limit that
makes the number a hundred;
this number cannot dispense with
any of them for its determinateness;
with respect to the hundredth, therefore,
the rest do not constitute a determinate existence
which is in any way different from it
whether inside or outside the limit.
Consequently, the number is not a plurality
over against the limiting one that encloses it,
but itself constitutes this delimitation
which is a determinate quantum;
the many constitute a number,
a one, a two, a ten, a hundred, etc.

Now, the limiting one is a discriminating determinateness,
the distinguishing of a number from other numbers.
But this distinguishing does not become
a qualitative determinateness;
it remains rather quantitative,
falling only within the compass
of comparing, of external reflection;
as one, number remains turned back onto itself
and indifferent to others.
This indifference of number to others
is its essential determination;
it constitutes its being-determined-in-itself,
but at the same time also its own exteriority.
Number is thus a numerical one that is absolutely determined
but which has at the same time the form of simple immediacy,
and to which, therefore, the connecting reference to
an other remains completely external.
Further, as numerical, the one possesses the determinateness
(such as consists in the reference to other) as a moment in it,
in its distinction of unit and amount;
and amount is itself the plurality of the ones,
that is, this absolute exteriority is in the one itself.
This intrinsic contradiction of number
or of quantum in general is the quality of quantum,
and the contradiction will develop in
the further determinations of this quality.
