C. ABSOLUTE NECESSITY

Real necessity is determinate necessity;
formal necessity does not yet have
any content and determinateness in it.
The determinateness of necessity consists in
its having its negation, contingency, within it.
This is how it has shown itself to be.

But in its first simplicity this determinateness is actuality;
determinate necessity is therefore immediate actual necessity.
This actuality which is itself as such necessary,
since it contains necessity as its in-itself,
is absolute actuality;
an actuality which can no longer be otherwise,
or its in-itself is not possibility but necessity itself.

But because this actuality is posited to be absolute,
that is to say, to be itself
the unity of itself and possibility,
it is consequently only an empty determination,
or it is contingency.
This emptiness of its determination makes it
into a mere possibility,
one which can just as well be an other
and is determined as possibility.
But this possibility is itself absolute possibility,
for it is precisely the possibility of being
equally determined as possibility and actuality.
For this reason, because it is this indifference towards itself,
it is posited as empty, contingent determination.

Thus real necessity not only contains contingency implicitly,
but the latter also becomes in it;
but this becoming, as externality,
is itself only the in-itself of the necessity,
because it is only an immediate determinateness.
But it is not only this but the necessity's own becoming
or the presupposition which it had is its own positing.
For as real necessity, it is the sublatedness
of actuality into possibility
and of possibility into actuality;
because it is this simple conversion of
one of these moments into the other,
it is also their positive unity,
for in the other each rejoins itself.
And so it is actuality, yet an actuality
which is nothing but this rejoining of form with itself.
Its negative positing of these moments is
thereby itself the presupposing
or the positing of itself as sublated,
or the positing of immediacy.

But it is precisely in this positing that
this actuality is determined as the negative;
it rejoins itself from the actuality which was real possibility;
this new actuality thus comes to be only out of its in-itself,
out of the negation of itself.
Consequently, it is at the same time
immediately determined as possibility,
as mediated by virtue of its negation.
But accordingly, this possibility is
immediately nothing but this mediating
in which the in-itself,
namely the possibility itself and the mediating,
both in the same manner, are positedness.
Thus it is necessity which is
equally the sublating of this positedness,
or the positing of immediacy and of the in-itself,
just as in this very sublating
it is the determining of it as positedness.
It is necessity itself, therefore,
that determines itself as contingency:
in its being it repels itself from itself,
in this very repelling has only returned to itself,
and in this turning back which is its being
has repelled itself from itself.

Thus has form pervaded in its realization all its distinctions;
it has made itself transparent
and, as absolute necessity,
is only this simple self-identity of
being in its negation, or in essence.
The distinction itself of content and form
has thus equally vanished;
for that unity of possibility in actuality
and actuality in possibility is the form
which in its determinateness or in positedness is
indifferent towards itself:
it is the fact full of content
on which the form of necessity
externally ran its course.
But necessity is thus this
reflected identity of the two determinations
as indifferent to them,
and hence the form determination of the in-itself
as against the positedness,
and this possibility constitutes the limitation of
the content which real necessity had.
The resolution of this difference is
however the absolute necessity
whose content is this difference
which in this necessity penetrates itself.

Absolute necessity is therefore the truth
in which actuality and possibility in general
as well as formal and real necessity return.
As we have just seen, it is being which in its negation,
in essence, refers itself to itself and is being.
It is equally simple immediacy or pure being
and simple immanent reflection or pure essence;
it is this, that the two are one and the same.
The absolutely necessary only is because it is;
it otherwise has neither condition nor ground.
But it equally is pure essence,
its being the simple immanent reflection;
it is because it is.
As reflection, it has a ground and a condition
but has only itself for this ground and condition.
It is in-itself, but its in-itself is its immediacy,
its possibility is its actuality.
It is, therefore, because it is;
as the rejoining of being with itself,
it is essence;
but because this simple is
equally immediate simplicity,
it is being.

Absolute necessity is thus
the reflection or form of the absolute,
the unity of being and essence,
simple immediacy which is absolute negativity.
On the one hand, therefore, its differences are
not like the determinations of reflection
but an existing manifoldness,
a differentiated actuality in the shape of others
independently subsisting over against each other.
On the other hand, since its connection is
that of absolute identity,
it is the absolute conversion of
its actuality into its possibility
and its possibility into its actuality.
Absolute necessity is therefore blind.
On the one hand, the two different terms
determined as actuality and possibility have
the shape of immanent reflection as being;
they are therefore free actualities,
neither of which reflectively shines in the other,
nor will either allow in it
a trace of its reference to the other;
grounded in itself, each is inherently necessary.
Necessity as essence is concealed in this being;
the reciprocal contact of these actualities appears
therefore, as an empty externality;
the actuality of the one in the other is
the possibility which is only possibility, contingency.
For being is posited as absolutely necessary,
as the self-mediation which is
the absolute negation of mediation-through-other,
or being which is identical only with being;
consequently, an other that has actuality in being,
is therefore determined as something merely possible,
as empty positedness.

But this contingency is rather absolute necessity;
it is the essence of those free, inherently necessary actualities.
This essence is averse to light,
because there is no reflective shining
in these actualities, no reflex:
because they are grounded purely in themselves,
are shaped for themselves,
manifest themselves only to themselves;
because they are only being.
But their essence will break forth in them
and will reveal what it is and what they are.
The simplicity of their being,
their resting just on themselves,
is absolute negativity;
it is the freedom of their reflectionless immediacy.
This negative breaks forth in them because being,
through this same negativity which is its essence,
is self-contradiction;
it will break forth against this
being in the form of being,
hence as the negation of those actualities,
a negation absolutely different from their being;
it will break forth as their nothing,
as an otherness which is just as free towards them
as their being is free.
Yet this negative was not to be missed in them.
In their self-based shape
they are indifferent to form,
are a content and consequently
different actualities
and a determinate content.
This content is the mark
that necessity impressed upon them
by letting them go free as absolutely actual;
for in its determination it is
an absolute turning back into itself.
It is the mark to which necessity appeals
as witness to its right,
and, overcome by it,
the actualities now perish.
This manifestation of what
determinateness is in its truth,
that it is negative self-reference,
is a blind collapse into otherness;
in the sphere of immediate existence,
the shining or the reflection
that breaks out in it is a becoming,
a transition of being into nothing.
But, conversely, being is equally essence,
and becoming is reflection or a shining.
Thus the externality is its inwardness;
their connection is one of absolute identity;
and the transition of the actual into the possible,
of being into nothing, is a self-rejoining;
contingency is absolute necessity;
it is itself the presupposing of that
first absolute actuality.

This identity of being with itself
in its negation is now substance.
It is this unity as in its negation
or as in contingency;
and so, as relation to itself, it is substance.
The blind transition of necessity is
rather the absolute's own exposition,
its movement in itself which, in its externalization,
reveals itself instead.

