
SECTION I

Determinateness (Quality)

Being is the indeterminate immediate;
it is free of determinateness with respect to essence,
just as it is still free of any determinateness
that it can receive within itself.
This reflectionless being is being
as it immediately is only within.

Since it is immediate, it is being without quality;
but the character of indeterminateness attaches to it in itself
only in opposition to what is determinate or qualitative.
Determinate being thus comes to stand over and against being in general;
with that, however, the very indeterminateness of being
constitutes its quality.
It will therefore be shown that the first being is
in itself determinate, and therefore secondly,
that it passes over into existence, is existence;
that this latter, however, as finite being, sublates itself
and passes over into the infinite reference of being to itself;
it passes over, thirdly, into being-for-itself.

CHAPTER 1

Being

A. BEING

Being, pure being, without further determination.
In its indeterminate immediacy it is equal only to itself
and also not unequal with respect to another;
it has no difference within it, nor any outwardly.
If any determination or content were posited in it as distinct,
or if it were posited by this determination or content
as distinct from an other,
it would thereby fail to hold fast to its purity.
It is pure indeterminateness and emptiness.
There is nothing to be intuited in it,
if one can speak here of intuiting;
or, it is only this pure empty intuiting itself.
Just as little is anything to be thought in it,
or, it is equally only this empty thinking.
Being, the indeterminate immediate is in fact nothing,
and neither more nor less than nothing.

B. NOTHING

Nothing, pure nothingness;
it is simple equality with itself,
complete emptiness,
complete absence of determination and content;
lack of all distinction within.
In so far as mention can be made here of
intuiting and thinking,
it makes a difference whether something or nothing is
being intuited or thought.
To intuit or to think nothing has therefore a meaning;
the two are distinguished and so nothing is (concretely exists)
in our intuiting or thinking;
or rather it is the empty intuiting and thinking itself,
like pure being.
Nothing is therefore the same determination
or rather absence of determination,
and thus altogether the same as what pure being is.

C. BECOMING

1. Unity of being and nothing

Pure being and pure nothing are therefore the same.
The truth is neither being nor nothing,
but rather that being has passed over into nothing
and nothing into being;
“has passed over,” not passes over.

But the truth is just as much that
they are not without distinction;
it is rather that they are not the same,
that they are absolutely distinct
yet equally unseparated and inseparable,
and that each immediately vanishes in its opposite.

Their truth is therefore this movement of
the immediate vanishing of the one into the other:
becoming, a movement in which the two are distinguished,
but by a distinction which has just as immediately dissolved itself.

2. The moments of becoming

Becoming is the unseparatedness of being and nothing,
not the unity that abstracts from being and nothing;
as the unity of being and nothing
it is rather this determinate unity,
or one in which being and nothing equally are.
However, inasmuch as being and nothing are
each unseparated from its other, each is not.
In this unity, therefore, they are,
but as vanishing, only as sublated.
They sink from their initially represented self-subsistence
into moments which are still distinguished
but at the same time sublated.

Grasped as thus distinguished,
each is in their distinguishedness
a unity with the other.
Becoming thus contains being and nothing as two such unities,
each of which is itself unity of being and nothing;
the one is being as immediate and as reference to nothing;
the other is nothing as immediate and as reference to being;
in these unities the determinations are of unequal value.

Becoming is in this way doubly determined.
In one determination, nothing is the immediate,
that is, the determination begins with nothing
and this refers to being;
that is to say, it passes over into it.
In the other determination, being is the immediate,
that is, the determination begins with being
and this passes over into nothing:
coming-to-be and ceasing-to-be.

Both are the same, becoming,
and even as directions that are so different
they interpenetrate and paralyze each other.
The one is ceasing-to-be;
being passes over into nothing,
but nothing is just as much the opposite of itself,
the passing-over into being, coming-to-be.
This coming-to-be is the other direction;
nothing goes over into being,
but being equally sublates itself
and is rather the passing-over into nothing;
it is ceasing-to-be.
They do not sublate themselves reciprocally
[the one sublating the other externally]
but each rather sublates itself in itself
and is within it the opposite of itself.

3. Sublation of becoming

The equilibrium in which coming-to-be and ceasing-to-be are poised
is in the first place becoming itself.
But this becoming equally collects itself in quiescent unity.
Being and nothing are in it only as vanishing;
becoming itself, however, is only by virtue of their being distinguished.
Their vanishing is therefore the vanishing of becoming,
or the vanishing of the vanishing itself.
Becoming is a ceaseless unrest that collapses into a quiescent result.

This can also be expressed thus:
becoming is the vanishing of being into nothing,
and of nothing into being,
and the vanishing of being and nothing in general;
but at the same time it rests on their being distinct.
It therefore contradicts itself in itself,
because what it unites within itself is self-opposed;
but such a union destroys itself.

This result is a vanishedness, but it is not nothing;
as such, it would be only a relapse into one of
the already sublated determinations
and not the result of nothing and of being.
It is the unity of being and nothing
that has become quiescent simplicity.
But this quiescent simplicity is being,
yet no longer for itself but as determination of the whole.

Becoming, as transition into
the unity of being and nothing,
a unity which is as existent
or has the shape of the one-sided
immediate unity of these moments,
is existence.
