A. THE SPECIFIC QUANTUM

1. Measure is the simple self-reference of quantum,
its own determinateness in itself;
quantum is thus qualitative.

At first, as an immediate measure it is
an immediate quantum and hence some specific quantum;
equally immediate is the quality that belongs to it;
it is some specific quality or other.
Thus quantum, as this no longer indifferent limit
but as self-referring externality, is itself quality
and, although distinguished from it,
it does not extend past it,
just as quality does not extend past quantum.
Quantum is thus the determinateness
that has returned into simple self-equality,
which is at one with determinate existence
just as determinate existence is at one with it.

If a proposition is to be made of the determination just obtained,
it could be expressed thus:
"Whatever is, has a measure."
Every existence has a magnitude,
and this magnitude belongs to the very nature of a something;
it constitutes its determinate nature and its in-itself.
The something is not indifferent to this magnitude,
as if, were the latter to alter, it would remain the same;
rather the alteration of the magnitude alters its quality.
As measure the quantum has ceased to be a limit which is none;
it is from now on the determination of a thing, so that,
were the latter to exceed or fall short of this quantum,
it would perish.

A measure, in the usual sense of a standard,
is a quantum which is arbitrarily assumed as
the unit determinate in itself as against an external amount.
Of course, such a unit can in fact also be determinate in itself,
like a foot or some such other original measure;
to the extent, however, that it is used as
the measuring standard for other things,
it is with respect to them only an external measure,
not their original measure.
Thus the diameter of the earth or the length of a pendulum
may be taken as a specific quantum on their own account.
But the choice of a fraction of the
earth's diameter
or of the pendulum's length,
and this last under which degree of latitude,
for use as a standard of measure is arbitrary.
And for other things such a standard is
something even more external.
These have further specified
the universal specific quantum in some particular way,
and they have thereby been made into particular things.
It is therefore foolish to speak of a natural standard of things.
Anyway, a universal standard is meant for use
only as an external comparison of things,
and in this superficial sense of universal standard
it is quite a matter of indifference
what is used for the purpose.
It is not meant to be a fundamental measure
in the sense that in it the natural measures
of particular things would be displayed and recognized,
according to a rule, as the specifications of one universal measure,
the measure of the things's universal body.
But without this meaning the sole interest and significance
of an absolute standard of measure is that of something common,
and any such standard is a universal
not in itself but only by convention.

Immediate measure is a simple determination of magnitude as,
for example, the size of organic beings, of their limbs, and so forth.
But any concrete existent has the size required for being what it is,
and for having existence in the first place.
As a quantum, the existent is an indifferent magnitude
open to external determination
and capable of fluctuating increases and decreases.
As a measure, however, it is at the same time
distinct from itself as quantum,
itself as such an indifferent determination,
and is a restriction on that indifferent fluctuation of a limit.
Since in the existence of anything
the quantitative determinateness is thus twofold,
in the sense that quality is tied to it
and yet the quantity can fluctuate without prejudice to quality
so the demise of anything that has a measure occurs
through the alteration of its quantum.
On the one hand, the demise appears unexpected,
inasmuch as there can be alteration
in the quantum without the measure
and the quality being altered;
but, on the other hand, it is made into something quite simple
to grasp by means namely of the concept of gradualness.
It is easy to turn to this category for visualizing
or "explaining" the disappearance of a quality or of a something,
for it gives the impression that one can witness this disappearance
as if before one's eyes:
since the quantum is posited as the external limit
which is by nature alterable,
the alteration (of quantum only) then follows by itself.
But in fact nothing is thereby explained,
for the alteration is at the same time essentially
the transition of one quality into another,
or the more abstract transition of one existence into a non-existence,
and therein lies another determination than just gradualness,
which is only a decrease or increase,
and the one-sided holding fast to magnitude.

2. The ancients had already taken notice of this coincidence,
that an alteration which appears to be only quantitative
suddenly changes into a qualitative one,
and they used popular examples to illustrate
the inconsistencies that arise when such
a coincidence is not understood.
Two such examples go under the familiar names
of "the bald" and "the heap."
They are elenchi, that is, according to Aristotle's explanation,
two ways in which one is compelled to say
the opposite of what one has previously asserted.
The question was put:
does the plucking of one hair from someone's head
or from a horse's tail produce baldness,
or does a heap cease to be a heap
if one grain is removed?
The expected answer can safely be conceded,
for the removal amounts to a merely quantitative difference,
and an insignificant one at that.
And so one hair is removed, one grain,
and this is repeated with only one hair and one grain
being removed each time the answer is conceded.
At last the qualitative alteration is revealed:
the head or the tail is bald; the heap has vanished.
In conceding the answer, it was not only
the repetition that was each time forgotten,
but also that the individually insignificant quantities
(like the individually insignificant disbursements from a patrimony)
add up, and the sum constitutes the qualitative whole,
so that at the end this whole has vanished:
the head is bald, the purse is empty.

The embarrassment, the contradiction, produced by the result,
is not anything sophistic in the usual sense of the word,
as if the contradiction were a pretense.
The mistake is committed by the assumed interlocutor
(that is, our ordinary consciousness),
and that is of assuming a quantity to be only an indifferent limit,
that is, of taking it in the narrowly defined sense of a quantity.
But this assumption is confounded by the truth to which it is brought,
namely that quantity is a moment of measure
and is linked to quality;
refuted is the one-sided stubborn adherence to the
abstract determinateness of quantum.
Also those elenchi are, therefore,
not anything frivolous or pedantic but basically correct:
they attest to a mind which has an interest
in the phenomena that come with thinking.
Quantum, when it is taken as indifferent limit,
is the side from which an existence is
unsuspectedly attacked and laid low.
It is the cunning of the concept
that it would seize on an existence from this side
where its quality does not seem to come into play;
and it does it so well that the aggrandizement
of a State or of a patrimony, etc.,
which will bring about the misfortune of the State or the owner,
even appears at first to be their good fortune.

3. Measure is in its immediacy an ordinary quality
of a specific magnitude appropriate to it.
Now there is also the distinction between the side
according to which quantum is an indifferent limit
that can fluctuate without the quality altering
and the other side according to which it is
qualitative and specific.
Both sides are the magnitude determinations of
one and the same thing;
but because of the original immediacy of measure,
this distinction too is to be taken as immediate,
and accordingly the two sides each also have
a diverse concrete existence.
The concrete existence of measure,
which is the side of magnitude determinate in itself,
then behaves towards the concrete existence
of the alterable external side by sublating
the indifference of the latter;
this is a specifying of measure.

