B. SPECIFYING MEASURE

First, this measure is a rule,
a measure external to the mere quantum.

Second, it is a specific quantity
determining the external quantum.

Third, the two sides, both as qualities
of specific quantitative determinacy,
relate to one another as one measure.

a. The rule

The rule, or the standard which we have just mentioned,
is in the first instance as a magnitude
which is determinate in itself
and is a unit with respect to a quantum
of a particular concrete existence:
this is a quantum with a concrete existence
which is other than the something of the rule,
is measured by the latter, that is,
is determined as the amount of the said unit.
This comparison is an external act,
and the unit itself is an arbitrary magnitude
which can in turn be posited as an amount
(the foot as an amount of inches).
But measure is not only an external rule;
as a specific measure its intrinsic nature is
that it relates to its other which is a quantum.

b. Specifying measure

Measure is a specific determining of the external magnitude, that is,
of the indifferent magnitude which is now posited
in the measuring something by some other concrete existence in general.
The something of the measure is indeed itself a quantum,
but with the difference that it is the qualitative side
determining the merely indifferent, external quantum.
It has intrinsically this side of being-for-other
to which the fluctuation in size belongs.
The immanent measuring is a quality of the something,
and this something is confronted by the same quality in another something;
in the latter, however, the quality is at first relative,
with a measureless quantum in general as against
the something determined as measuring.
Inasmuch as a something has an internal measure,
an alteration of the magnitude of its quality comes to it from outside,
and the something does not take on
the arithmetical aggregate of the alteration.
Its measure reacts against it,
behaves towards the aggregate as an intensive measure
and assimilates it in a way typically its own;
it alters the externally imposed alteration,
makes something else out of this quantum
and demonstrates through this specifying function
that in this externality it is for-itself.
This specifically assimilated aggregate is itself
a quantum which is also dependent on the other, that is,
on the other aggregate which is only external to it.
The specified aggregate is therefore also alterable,
but is not for that reason a quantum as such
but the external quantum as specified in a constant manner.
Measure thus has its determinate existence as a ratio,
and its specificity is in general the exponent of this ratio.

In intensive and extensive quantum,
as we saw when considering these determinations,
it is the same quantum which is present,
once in the form of intensity
and again in the form of extension.
In this difference the underlying quantum
does not suffer any alteration;
the difference is only an external form.
In the specifying measure, on the contrary,
the quantum is taken in one instance in its immediate magnitude,
but through the exponent of the ratio
it is taken in a second instance in another amount.

The exponent which constitutes the element of specificity can appear
at first to be a fixed quantum, as a quotient of the ratio between the
external and the qualitatively determined quantum.
But it would then be nothing more than an external quantum
whereas by the exponent we are to understand here nothing
but the qualitative moment itself that specifies the quantum as such.
The only strictly immanent qualitative determination of
the quantum is (as we saw earlier) that of the exponent,
and it must be such an exponential determination
which now constitutes the ratio and which,
as the internally existent determination,
comes to confront the quantum as externally constituted.
The principle of this quantum is the numerical one
which constitutes its internal determinateness:
the mode of connection of this numerical one is external,
and the alteration which is determined only
through the nature of the immediate quantum as such consists
essentially in the addition of one such numerical one
and then another and so forth.
As the external quantum alters in arithmetical progression in this way,
the specifying reaction of the qualitative nature produces another series
which refers to the first, increases and decreases with it,
not however in a ratio determined by a numerical exponent
but in a ratio which is numerically incommensurable,
in the manner of a power determination.

c. Relation of the two sides as qualities

1. The qualitative side of the quantum, in itself determined,
exists only as a reference to the external quantitative side;
as specifying the latter, it is a sublating of its externality
through which quantum as such is.
This qualitative side thus has a quantum
for the presupposition from which it starts.
But this quantum is also qualitatively distinguished from quality,
and this difference between the two must now be posited in the immediacy
of being in general which still characterizes measure.
The two sides thus stand to each other in a qualitative respect,
each a qualitative existence for itself,
and the one side that was at first only an internally indeterminate
formal quantum is the quantum of a something and of its quality,
and, just as their reciprocal reference is
now determined as measure in general,
so too is the specific magnitude of these qualities.
These qualities stand in relation to each other according
to a determination of measure.
This determination is their exponent,
but they are already implicitly connected
to each other in the being-for-itself of measure:
the quantum is in its double being
external quantum and specific quantum,
so that each of the distinct quantities has
this double determination in it
and is at the same time inextricably interwoven with the other;
it is in this way alone that the qualities are determined.
They are not, therefore, a determinate being in general
existing for each other but are rather posited as indivisible,
and the specific magnitude tied to them is a qualitative unity:
one determination of measure in which they are
implicitly bound together in accordance with their concept.
Measure is thus the immanent quantitative relating
of two qualities to each other.

2. In measure we have the essential determination of variable magnitude,
for measure is sublated quantum;
quantum, therefore, no longer as that
which it ought to be in order to be quantum,
but quantum as quantum and as something other besides.
This other is the qualitative element
and, as we have established, is nothing else
than the relation of powers of the quantum.
In immediate measure, this variability is not yet posited;
it is just one single quantum or other to which a quality is attached.
In the specifying of measure (the preceding determination),
which is an alteration of the merely external quantum
by the qualitative moment,
what is posited is the distinctness of two determinate magnitudes
and hence in general the plurality of measures
in one common, external quantum.
And it is in this differentiation of the quantum from itself
that the latter shows itself for the first time to be a real measure,
for it appears as a being which is one and the same
(e.g. the constant temperature of the medium)
and at the same time of diversified and indeed quantitative existence
(in the various temperatures of the bodies found in the medium).
This differentiation of quantum into the diverse qualities
(the different bodies) yields a further form of measure,
one in which the two sides relate to each other
as qualitatively determined quanta,
and this can be called the realized measure.

Magnitude, simply as such, is alterable, for its determinateness is
a limit which at the same time is none;
the alteration only affects, therefore,
a particular quantum in place of which another is posited.
But the genuine alteration is that of the quantum as such.
Here we have the determination, interesting when so understood,
of the variable magnitude of higher mathematics
in which we neither need to stop short at the formal deter-
mination of alteration or variability in general
nor introduce any other determination except
the simple determination of the concept by which
the other of the quantum is only the qualitative.
The genuine determination, therefore, of real variable magnitude is
that it is qualitative, that is, as we have sufficiently shown,
that it is determined by a ratio of powers.
Posited in this variable magnitude is
that quantum has no value as such but only
as determined in conformity with its other, that is, qualitatively.
The two sides in this relating have,
in keeping with their abstract side as qualitites in general,
some particular meaning or other, for instance, space and time.
Taken at first simply as determinacies of magnitude
in their ratio of measure,
one of them is the amount which increases and decreases
in external arithmetical progression;
the other is an amount specifically determined by the other amount,
which for it is the unit.
If each of these two sides were only a particular quality in general,
there would be no way of distinguishing which of them is
to be taken with respect to their determination of magnitude
as merely externally quantitative
and which as varying in quantitative specification.
If they are related, for instance, as root and square,
it is indifferent which is regarded as increasing or decreasing
in merely external arithmetical progression,
and which on the contrary has
its specific determination in this quantum.

But the two qualities are not indeterminate in their difference,
for they are the moments of measure
and the qualification of the latter ought to rest on them.
The closest determinateness of the qualitites themselves is,
of the one, the extensive, that it is an externality within;
and of the other, the intensive, that it exists in itself
or is the negative as against the other.
Accordingly, amount is the quantitative moment
that pertains to the former,
and unit the one that pertains to the latter;
in simple direct ratio, the former is to be taken
as the dividend and the latter as the divisor;
in specifying ratio, the former as the power
or the becoming-other and the latter as the root.
Inasmuch as we still count here, that is,
we reflect on the external quantum
(which is thus the totally accidental determinateness of
magnitude which we call empirical),
and accordingly also equally take the alteration
as advancing in external arithmetical progression,
then this falls on the side of the unit, the intensive quality;
the external extensive side, by contrast,
is to be represented as altering in the specified series.
But the direct ratio (like velocity as such, st ) is reduced here
to a formal determination which has no concrete existence
but belongs rather only to the abstraction of reflection;
and even though in the ratio of root and square (as in s = at 2 ),
the root is to be taken as an empirical quantum
varying in an arithmetical progression,
the other side as specified instead,
the higher realization of
the qualification of the quantitative moment,
one which would be more in keeping with the concept, is this:
that both sides are related in higher determinations of powers
(as in s^3 = at^2 ).

