
CHAPTER 2

Appearance

Concrete existence is the immediacy of being
to which essence has again restored itself.
In itself this immediacy is the reflection of essence into itself.
As concrete existence, essence has stepped out of its ground
which has itself passed over into it.
Concrete existence is this reflected immediacy
in so far as, within, it is absolute negativity.
It is now also posited as such,
in that it has determined itself as appearance.

At first, therefore, appearance is
essence in its concrete existence;
essence is immediately present in it.
That it is not immediate,
but rather reflected concrete existence,
constitutes the moment of essence in it;
or concrete existence,
as essential concrete existence,
is appearance.

Something is only appearance,
in the sense that concrete existence is
as such only a posited being,
not something that is in-and-for-itself.
This is what constitutes its essentiality,
to have the negativity of reflection,
the nature of essence, within it.
There is no question here of an alien,
external reflection to which essence would belong
and which, by comparing this essence with concrete existence,
would declare the latter to be appearance.
On the contrary, as we have seen,
this essentiality of concrete existence,
that it is appearance, is
concrete existence's own truth.
The reflection by virtue of which
it is this is its own.

But if it is said that something is only appearance,
meaning that as contrasted with it
immediate concrete existence is the truth,
then the fact is that appearance is the higher truth,
for it is concrete existence as essential,
whereas concrete existence is appearance
that is still void of essence
because it only contains in it
the one moment of appearance,
namely that of concrete existence
as immediate, not yet negative, reflection.
When appearance is said to be essenceless,
one thinks of the moment of its negativity as if,
by contrast with it, the immediate were
the positive and the true;
in fact, however, this immediate does not
yet contain essential truth in it.
Concrete existence rather ceases to be essenceless
by passing over into appearance.

Essence reflectively shines at first
just within, in its simple identity;
as such, it is abstract reflection,
the pure movement of nothing
through nothing back to itself.
Essence appears, and so it now is real shine,
since the moments of the shine have concrete existence.
Appearance, as we have seen, is the thing as
the negative mediation of itself with itself;
the differences which it contains
are self-subsisting matters
which are the contradiction of
being an immediate subsistence,
yet of obtaining their subsistence
only in an alien self-subsistence,
hence in the negation of their own,
but then again, just because of that,
also in the negation of that alien self-subsistence
or in the negation of their own negation.
Reflective shine is this same mediation,
but its fleeting moments obtain in appearance
the shape of immediate self-subsistence.
On the other hand, the immediate self-subsistence
which pertains to concrete existence is reduced to a moment.
Appearance is therefore the unity of
reflective shine and concrete existence.

Appearance now determines itself further.
It is concrete existence as essential;
as essential, concrete existence
differs from the concrete existence
which is unessential,
and these two sides
refer to each other.

Appearance is, therefore,
first, simple self-identity
which also contains
diverse content determinations
and, both as identity
and as the connecting reference
of these determinations,
is that which remains self-equal
in the flux of appearance;
this is the law of appearance.

But, second, the law which is
simple in its diversity
passes over into opposition;
the essential moment of appearance becomes
opposed to appearance itself
and, confronting the world of appearance,
the world that exists in itself
comes onto the scene.

Third, this opposition returns into its ground;
that which is in itself is in the appearance
and, conversely, that which appears is determined
as taken up into its being-in-itself.
Appearance becomes relation.

A. THE LAW OF APPEARANCE

1. Appearance is the concrete existent
mediated through its negation,
which constitutes its subsistence.
This, its negation, is
indeed another self-subsistent;
but the latter is just as
essentially something sublated.
The concrete existent is consequently
the turning back of itself into itself
through its negation and through
the negation of this negation;
it has, therefore, essential self-subsistence,
just as it is equally immediately an absolute positedness
that has a ground and an other for its subsistence.
In the first place, therefore, appearance is
concrete existence along with its essentiality,
the positedness along with its ground;
but this ground is the negation,
and the other self-subsistent,
the ground of the first,
is equally only a positedness.
Or the concrete existent is,
as an appearance,
reflected into an other
and has this other for its ground,
and this ground is itself only this,
to be reflected into another.
The essential self-subsistence
that belongs to it because
it is a turning back into itself is,
for the sake of the negativity of the moments,
the return of nothing through nothing back to itself;
the self-subsistence of the concrete existent is
therefore only the reflective shine of essence.
The linkage of the reciprocally grounding
concrete existents consists, therefore,
in this reciprocal negation,
namely that the subsistence of the one is not
the subsistence of the other but is its positedness,
where this connection of positedness
alone constitutes their subsistence.
The ground is present as it is in truth,
namely as being a first which is only a presupposed.

This now constitutes the negative side of appearance.
In this negative mediation, however,
there is immediately contained the positive identity of
the concrete existent with itself.
For this concrete existent is not positedness
vis-à-vis an essential ground,
or is not the reflective shine in a self-subsistent,
but is rather positedness that refers itself to a positedness,
or a reflective shine only in a reflective shine.
In this, its negation, or in its other
which is itself something sublated,
it refers to itself and is thus
self-identical or positive essentiality.
This identity is not the immediacy
that pertains to concrete existence as such
and only is its unessential moment of subsisting in an other.
It is rather the essential content of appearance which has two sides:
first, to be in the form of positedness or external immediacy;
second, to be positedness as self-identical.
According to the first side, it is as a determinate being,
but one which in keeping with its immediacy is accidental, unessential,
and subject to transition, to coming-to-be and passing-away.
According to the other side, it is the simple content determination
exempted from that flux, the permanent element in it.

This content, besides being in general
the simple element of the transient,
is also a determined content, varied in itself.
It is the reflection of appearance,
of the negative determinate being, into itself,
and therefore contains determinateness essentially.
Appearance is however the multifarious diversity of
immediately existing beings that revels in unessential manifoldness;
its reflected content, on the other hand,
is its manifoldness reduced to simple difference.
Or, more precisely, the determinate essential content
is not just determined in general but,
as the essential element of appearance,
is complete determinateness;
the one and its other.
Each of these two has in appearance
its subsistence in the other,
but in such a way that it is at the same time
only in the other's non-subsistence.
This contradiction sublates itself;
and its reflection into itself is
the identity of their two-sided subsistence,
namely that the positedness of the one is
also the positedness of the other.
The two constitute one subsistence,
each at the same time as a different content
indifferent to the other.
In the essential side of appearance,
the negativity of the unessential content,
that it sublates itself, has thus gone back into identity;
it is an indifferent subsistence
which is not the sublatedness of the other
but rather its subsistence.

This unity is the law of appearance.

2. The law is thus the positive element
of the mediation of what appears.
Appearance is at first concrete existence
as negative self-mediation,
so that the concrete existent,
through its own non-subsistence,
through an other and again through
the non-subsistence of this other,
is mediated with itself.
In this there is contained,
first, the merely reflective shining
and the disappearing of both,
the unessential appearance;
second, also the persistence or the law;
for each of the two concretely exists
in the sublation of the other,
and their positedness is as
their negativity at the same time
the identical positive positedness of both.

This permanent subsistence which appearance
obtains in the law is thus,
as it has determined itself,

first, opposed to the immediacy
of the being which concrete existence has.
This immediacy is indeed one which is in itself reflected,
namely the ground that has gone back into itself;
but in appearance this simple immediacy is now distinguished
from the reflected immediacy that first began
to separate itself in the “thing.”
The concretely existing thing in its dissolution
has become this opposition;
the positive element of its dissolution is
the said self-identity of what appears,
a positedness in the positedness of its other.

Second, this reflected immediacy is itself determined
as positedness over against the immediate determinate
being of concrete existence.
This positedness is henceforth what is essential
and the true positive.
The German expression Gesetz [law] likewise contains this
note of positedness or Gesetztsein.
In this positedness there lies the essential connection of
the two sides of the difference that the law contains;
they are a diverse content,
each immediate with respect to the other,
and they are this as the reflection of
the disappearing content belonging to appearance.
As essential difference, the different sides are
simple, self-referring determinations of content.
But just as equally, neither is immediate,
just for itself, but is rather essential positedness,
or is only to the extent that the other is.

Third, appearance and law have one and the same content.
The law is the reflection of appearance into self-identity;
appearance, as an immediate which is null,
thus stands opposed to that which is immanently reflected,
and the two are distinguished according to form.
But the reflection of appearance
by virtue of which this difference is,
is also the essential identity of
appearance itself and its reflection,
and this is in general the nature of reflection;
it is what in the positedness is self-identical
and indifferent to that difference,
which is form or positedness
hence a content continuous
from appearance to law,
the content of the law
and of the appearance.

This content thus constitutes the substrate of appearance;
the law is this substrate itself,
appearance is the same content but contains still more,
namely the unessential content of its immediate being.
And so is also the form determination by which
appearance as such is distinguished from the law,
namely a content and equally a content distinguished
from the content of the law.
For concrete existence, as immediacy in general,
is likewise a self-identity of matter and form
which is indifferent to its form determinations
and is, therefore, a content;
the concrete existence is the thinghood
with its properties and matters.
But it is the content whose self-subsisting immediacy is
at the same time also only a non-subsistence.
But the self-identity of the content
in this its non-subsistence
is the other, essential content.
This identity, the substrate of appearance,
which constitutes law,
is appearances's own moment;
it is the positive side of the essentiality
by virtue of which concrete existence is appearance.

The law, therefore, is not beyond appearance
but is immediately present in it;
the kingdom of laws is the restful copy
of the concretely existing or appearing world.
But, more to the point, the two are one totality,
and the concretely existing world is itself
the kingdom of laws which, simple identity,
is at the same time self-identical in the positedness
or in the self-dissolving self-subsistence of concrete existence.
In the law, concrete existence returns to its ground;
appearance contains both of these, the simple ground
and the dissolving movement of the appearing universe,
of which the law is the essentiality.

3. The law is therefore the essential appearance;
it is the latter's reflection into itself in its positedness,
the identical content of itself and the unessential concrete existence.

In the first place, this identity of the law
with its concrete existence is now, to start with,
immediate, simple identity, and the law is indifferent
with respect to its concrete existence;
appearance still has another content as
contrasted with the content of the law.
That content is indeed the unessential one
and the return into the latter;
but for the law it is an original starting point not posited by it;
as content, therefore, it is externally bound up with the law.
Appearance is an aggregate of more detailed determinations
that belong to the “this” or the concrete,
and are not contained in the law
but are rather determined each by an other.

Secondly, that which appearance contains
distinct from the law determined itself as
something positive or as another content;
but it is essentially a negative;
it is the form and its movement is
a movement that belongs to appearance.
The kingdom of laws is
the restful content of appearance;
the latter is this same content
but displayed in restless flux
and as reflection-into-other.
It is the law as negative,
relentlessly self-mutating concrete existence,
the movement of the passing over into the opposite,
of self-sublation and return into unity.
This side of the restless form
or of the negativity
does not contain the law;
as against the law, therefore,
appearance is the totality,
for it contains the law but more yet,
namely the moment of the self-moving form.

Thirdly, this shortcoming is manifested
in the law in the mere diversity at first,
and the consequent internal indifference, of its content;
the identity of its sides with one another
is at first, therefore,
only immediate and hence inner,
not yet necessary in other words.
In a law two content determinations are
essentially bound together
(for instance, spatial and temporal magnitudes
in the law of falling bodies:
the traversed spaces vary as
the squares of the elapsed times);
they are bound together;
this connection is at first
only an immediate one.

At first, therefore, it is likewise only a posited connection,
just as the immediate has obtained in appearance
the meaning of positedness in general.
The essential unity of the two sides
of the law would be their negativity,
namely that each contains the other in it;
but in the law this essential unity has not yet come the fore.
(Thus it is not contained in the concept of
the space traversed by a falling body
that time corresponds to it as a square.
Because the falling is a sensible movement,
it is the ratio of space and time;
but first, that time refers to space and space to time
does not lie in the determination of time itself,
that is to say, in time as ordinarily represented;
it is said that time can very well be represented
without space and space without time;
the one thus comes to the other externally,
and their external reference to each other is movement.
Second, the more particular determination of
how the magnitudes further relate to
each other in movement is indifferent.
The relevant law here is drawn from experience
and is to this extent immediate;
there is still required a proof,
that is, a mediation,
in order to know that the law
not only occurs but is necessary;
the law as such does not contain
this proof and its objective necessity.)

The law is, therefore, only
the positive essentiality of appearance,
not its negative essentiality according to which
the content determinations are moments of the form,
as such pass over into their other
and are in their own selves
not themselves but their other.
In the law, therefore, although
the positedness of the one side of it is
the positedness of the other side,
the content of the two sides is
indifferent to this connection;
it does not contain this positedness in it.
Law, therefore, is indeed essential form,
but not as yet real form which is reflected
into its sides as content.
