
C. TRANSITION OF CHEMISM

Even ordinary chemistry shows examples of
chemical alterations in which a body, for example,
imparts a higher oxidation to one part of its mass
and thereby reduces another part to a lower degree of the same,
at which degree alone it can enter into a neutral combination
with another differing body brought into contact with it,
a combination to which it would not have been receptive
at that other first immediate degree.
What happens here is that the object does not connect
with another in accordance with an immediate, one-sided determinateness,
but, in accordance with the inner totality of an original relation,
posits the presupposition which it needs for a real connection
and thereby gives itself a middle term by virtue of which
it unites its concept with its reality in conclusion;
it is a singularity determined in and for itself,
the concrete concept as the principle of the disjunction
into extremes whose re-union is the activity of
that same negative principle that thereby
returns to its first determination,
but returns to it objectified.

Chemism is itself the first negation
of the indifferent objectivity
and of the externality of determinateness;
it is still burdened, therefore,
by the immediate self-subsistence
of the object and with externality.
Consequently it is not yet for itself
that totality of self-determination
that proceeds from it
and in which it is rather sublated.
The three syllogisms that have resulted
constitute its totality.
The first has formal neutrality
for its middle term and
for extremes the objects in tension.
The second has for its middle term the
product of the first, real neutrality;
and for extremes the disrupting activity
and its product, the indifferent element.
But the third is the self-realizing concept
that posits for itself the presupposition
by virtue of which the process of its
realization is conditioned:
a syllogism that has the universal for its essence.
Yet, on account of the immediacy and externality
by which the chemical objectivity is still determined,
these three syllogisms fall apart.
The first process whose product is
the neutrality of the tensed objects is
extinguished in this product
and is re-activated only by
a differentiation that comes to it from outside;
conditioned by an immediate presupposition,
the process is exhausted in it.
The excretion out of the neutral product
of the non-indifferent extremes,
as also their decomposition into their abstract elements,
must likewise proceed from conditions and
stimulations of activity brought in from the outside.
But the two essential moments of the process,
neutralization on the one hand
and dissolution and reduction on the other,
since they too are bound together
in one and the same process
and the union blunting the tension of the extremes is
also a separation into these,
constitute on account of the still underlying
externality two diverse sides;
the extremes that are separated in that same process
are other than the objects or matters uniting in it;
in so far as the former proceed from it again
as non-indifferent, they must turn outwards;
their renewed neutralization is a process other
than the one that took place in the first.

But these various processes,
which have demonstrated themselves to be necessary,
are equally so many stages by which
externality and conditionality are sublated,
and from which the concept emerges as
determined in and for itself,
a totality unconditioned by externality.
In the first process, what is sublated is
the externality of the mutually non-indifferent extremes that
constitute the whole reality,
or the distinction between the implicitly
determinate concept and its existing determinateness.
Sublated in the second process is the externality
of the real unity, union as merely neutral.
Or more precisely, the formal activity sublates itself
in bases that are equally formal, neutral determinacies
whose inner concept is now the absolute activity
that has withdrawn into itself
and now realizes itself internally,
that is, posits the determinate difference within itself
and through this mediation constitutes itself as real unity;
this is a mediation which is thus the concept's
own mediation, its self-determination
and, considering that in it
the concept reflects itself back into itself,
an immanent presupposing.
The third syllogism, which on the one hand is
the restoration of the preceding processes,
sublates on the other hand the last
remaining moment of indifferent bases:
it sublates the whole abstract external immediacy
that becomes in this way
the concept's own moment of self-mediation.
The concept that has thus sublated as external
all the moments of its objective existence,
and has posited them in its simple unity,
is thereby completely liberated from
the objective externality to which
it refers only as an unessential reality.
This objective free concept is purpose.
