
A. THE CHEMICAL OBJECT

The chemical object is distinguished from
the mechanical in that the latter is
a totality indifferent to determinateness,
whereas in the chemical object the determinateness,
and hence the reference to other,
and the mode and manner of this reference,
belong to its nature.
This determinateness is at the same time
essentially a particularization,
that is, it is taken up into universality;
thus it is a principle:
a determinateness which is universal,
not only the determinateness
of the one singular object
but also of the other.
In the chemical object there is now, therefore,
a distinction in its concept,
between the inner totality of the two determinacies
and the determinateness that constitutes
the nature of the singular object
in its externality and concrete existence.
Since in this way the object is implicitly the whole concept,
it has within it the necessity and the impulse
to sublate its opposed, one-sided subsistence,
and to bring itself in existence to the real whole
which it is according to its concept.

Regarding the expression “chemism” for the said
relation of the non-indifference of objectivity,
it may be further remarked that the expression is
not to be understood here as though the relation were
only to be found in that form of elemental nature
that strictly goes by that name.
Already the meteorological relation must be regarded
as a process whose parts have more the nature
of physical than chemical elements.
In animate things, the sex relation falls under this schema,
and the schema also constitutes the formal basis
for the spiritual relations of love, friendship, and the like.

On closer examination, the chemical object is
at first a self-subsistent totality in general,
one reflected into itself and therefore distinct
from its reflectedness outwards, an indifferent basis,
the individual not yet determined as non-indifferent;
the person, too, is in the first instance a basis
of this kind, one that refers only to itself.
But the immanent determinateness
that constitutes the object's non-indifference is,
first, reflected into itself in such a manner
that this retraction of the reference outwards is
only a formal abstract universality;
the outwards reference is thus a determination
of the object's immediacy and concrete existence.
From this side the object does not return,
within it, to individual totality:
the negative unity has its two moments
of opposition in two particular objects.
Accordingly, a chemical object is
not comprehensible from itself,
and the being of one object is
the being of another.
But, second, the determinateness is
absolutely reflected into itself
and is the concrete moment of
the individual concept of the whole
which is the universal essence,
the real genus of the particular objects.
The chemical object,
which is thus the contradiction
of its immediate positedness
and its immanent individual concept,
is a striving to sublate
the immediate determinateness of its existence
and to give concrete existence to
the objective totality of the concept.
Hence it does still remain a non-self-subsistent object,
but in such a way that it is by nature in tension
with this lack of self-subsistence
and initiates the process as a self-determining.
