
CHAPTER 3

Ratio or the quantitative relation

The infinity of quantum has been determined up to
the point where it is the negative beyond of quantum,
a beyond which quantum, however, has within it.
This beyond is the qualitative moment in general.
The infinite quantum, as the unity of the two moments,
of the quantitative and the qualitative determinateness,
is in the first instance ratio.

In ratio, quantum no longer has
a merely indifferent determinateness
but is qualitatively determined as
simply referring to its beyond.
It continues in its beyond, and this beyond is
at first just an other quantum.
Essentially, however, the two do not refer
to each other as external quanta
but each rather possesses its determinateness
in this reference to the other.
In this, in their otherness, they have
thus returned into themselves;
what each is, that it is in its other;
the other constitutes the determinateness of each.
The quantum's self-transcendence does not now mean, therefore,
that quantum has simply changed either into some other
or into its abstract other, into its abstract beyond,
but that there, in the other, it has attained its determinateness;
in its other, which is an other quantum, it finds itself.
The quality of quantum, its conceptual determinateness,
is its externality as such,
and in ratio quantum is now posited as having
its determinateness in this externality, in another quantum;
as being in its beyond what it is.
It is quanta that stand to each other in the connection
that has now come on the scene.
This connection is itself also a magnitude;
quantum is not only in relation,
but is itself posited as relation;
it is a quantum as such that has
that qualitative determinateness in itself.
So, as relation (as ratio),
quantum gives expression to itself as self-enclosed totality
and to its indifference to limit by containing
the externality of its being-determined in itself:
in this externality it is only referred back to itself
and is thus infinite within.

Ratio in general is:

1. direct ratio.
In this, the qualitative moment does not
yet emerge explicitly as such;
in no other way except still as quantum is quantum posited
as having its determinateness in its externality.
In itself, however, the quantitative relation is
the contradiction of externality and self-reference,
the persistence of quanta and their negation.
Such a contradiction next sublates itself:

2. first inasmuch as in indirect or inverse ratio
the negation of each of the quanta is
as such co-posited in the alteration of the other,
and the variability of the direct ratio is itself posited;

3. but in the ratio of powers, the unity,
which in its difference refers back to itself,
proves to be a simple self-production of the quantum;
this qualitative moment itself,
finally posited in a simple determination
and as identical with the quantum, becomes measure.

About the nature of the following ratios,
much was anticipated in the preceding remarks
concerning the infinity of quantity, that is,
the qualitative moment in it;
it only remains to analyze, therefore,
the abstract concept of this ratio.
