
CHAPTER 2

Foundation

The essentialities or the determinations of reflection

Reflection is determined reflection;
accordingly, essence is determined essence, or it is essentiality.

Reflection is the shining of essence within itself.

Essence, as infinite immanent turning back is
not immediate simplicity, but negative simplicity;
it is a movement across moments that are distinct,
is absolute mediation with itself.
But in these moments it shines;
the moments are, therefore, themselves
determinations reflected into themselves.

First, essence is simple self-reference, pure identity.
This is its determination, one by which it is rather
the absence of determination.

Second, the specifying determination is difference,
difference which is either external or indefinite,
diversity in general, or opposed diversity or opposition.

Third, as contradiction this opposition is reflected into itself
and returns to its foundation.

A. IDENTITY

1. Essence is simple immediacy as sublated immediacy.
Its negativity is its being;
it is equal to itself in its absolute negativity
by virtue of which otherness and reference to other
have as such simply disappeared into pure self-equality.
Essence is therefore simple self-identity.

This self-identity is the immediacy of reflection.
It is not that self-equality which being is, or also nothing,
but a self-equality which, in producing itself as unity,
does not produce itself over again, as from another,
but is a pure production, from itself and in itself,
essential identity.

It is not, therefore, abstract identity
or an identity which is the result
of a relative negation preceding it,
one that separates indeed
what it distinguishes from it
but, for the rest, leaves it existing outside it,
the same after as before.

Being, and every determinateness of being,
has rather sublated itself not relatively,
but in itself, and this simple negativity,
the negativity of being in itself,
is the identity itself.

In general, therefore,
it is still the same as essence.
