
CHAPTER 3

The essential relation

The truth of appearance is the essential relation.
Its content has immediate self-subsistence:
the existent immediacy and the reflected immediacy
or the self-identical reflection.
In this self-subsistence, however,
it is at the same time a relative content;
it is simply and solely as a reflection into its other,
or as unity of the reference with its other.
In this unity, the self-subsistent content is
something posited, sublated;
but precisely this unity is what constitutes
its essentiality and self-subsistence;
this reflection into an other is reflection into itself.
The relation has sides, since it is reflection into an other;
so its difference is internal to it,
and its sides are independent subsistence,
for in their mutually indifferent diversity
they are thrown back into themselves,
so that the subsistence of each equally has its meaning
only in its reference to the other
or in the negative unity of both.

The essential relation is therefore not yet
the true third to essence and to concrete existence
but already contains the determinate union of the two.
Essence is realized in it in such a way that
it has self-subsistent, concrete existents for its subsistence,
and these concrete existents have returned
from their indifference back into their essential unity
so that they have only this unity as their subsistence.
Also the reflective determinations
of positive and negative are
reflected into themselves only as
each is reflected into its opposite;
but they have no other determination
besides this their negative unity,
whereas the essential relation has sides
that are posited as self-subsistent totalities.
It is the same opposition as that of positive and negative,
but it is such as an inverted world.
The side of the essential relation is a totality
which, however, essentially has an opposite or a beyond;
it is only appearance;
its concrete existence,
rather than being its own,
is that of its other.
It is, therefore, something internally fractured;
but this, its sublated being, consists in
its being the unity of itself and its other,
therefore a whole, and precisely for this reason
it has self-subsistent concrete existence
and is essential reflection into itself.

This is the concept of relation.
At first, however, the identity it contains
is not yet perfect;
the totality which each relative is as relative,
is only an inner one;
the side of the relation is posited at first
in one of the determinations of negative unity;
what constitutes the form of the relation is
the specific self-subsistence of each of the two sides.
The identity of the form is therefore only a reference,
and the self-subsistence of the sides falls outside it,
that is to say, it falls in the sides;
we still do not have the reflected unity
of the identity of the relation
and of the self-subsistent concrete existents;
we still do not have substance.
It follows that the concept of relation has
indeed shown itself to be the unity
of reflected and immediate self-subsistence.
But it is this concept still immediately at first;
immediate are therefore its moments vis-à-vis each other,
and immediate is the unity of the reference
connecting them essentially;
a unity this, which only then is the true unity
that conforms to the concept,
when it has realized itself, that is to say,
through its movement has posited itself as this unity.

The essential relation is therefore immediately
the relation of the whole and the parts
the reference of reflected and immediate self-subsistence,
so that both are at the same time
mutually conditioning and presupposing.

In this relation, neither of the sides is
yet posited as moment of the other;
their identity is therefore itself one side,
or not their negative unity.
Hence, secondly, the relation passes over into one
in which one side is the moment of the other
and is present there as in its ground,
the true self-subsistent element of both.
This is the relation of force and its expression.

Third, the inequality still present
in this reference sublates itself,
and the final relation is that of inner and outer.
In this difference,
which has now become totally formal,
relation itself founders,
and substance or actuality come on the stage
as the absolute unity of
immediate and reflected concrete existence.
