
D. THE JUDGMENT OF THE CONCEPT

To know how to form judgments of existence,
such as “the rose is red,” “the snow is white,” etc.,
hardly counts as a sign of great power of judgment.
The judgments of reflection are more in the nature of propositions;
to be sure, in the judgment of necessity
the subject matter is present in its objective universality,
but it is only in the judgment now to be considered
that its connection with the concept is to be found.
The concept is at the basis of this judgment,
and it is there with reference to the subject matter,
as an ought to which reality may or may not conform.
This is the judgment, therefore, that first contains true adjudication;
the predicates, “good,” “bad,” “true,” “right,” etc.,
express that the fact is measured against the concept
as an ought which is simply presupposed,
and is, or is not, in agreement with it.

The judgment of the concept has been called
the judgment of modality,
and has been regarded as containing
the form of the connection of subject and predicate
as this obtains in an external understanding,
and as concerned with the value of the copula
only in connection with thought.
Accordingly, judgment is said to be problematic
when the affirmation or negation is taken
as optional or possible;
assertoric, when it is taken as true, that is, actual,
and apodictic when it is taken as necessary.
It is easy to see why it would be an easy step
in this judgment to go outside the judgment itself
and to regard its determination as something merely subjective.
For it is the concept here, the subjective,
that comes into play again in judgment
and relates to an immediate actuality.
But this subjectivity is not to be confused
with external reflection,
which is of course also something subjective
but in a different sense than the concept itself;
on the contrary, the concept that has again emerged
out of the disjunctive judgment is
the very opposite of a mere mode or manner.
The earlier judgments are subjective in this sense,
for they rest on an abstract one-sidedness
in which the concept is lost.
But the judgment of the concept is instead objective
and, as contrasted with the others,
it is the truth,
for it rests on the concept precisely
in its determinateness as concept,
not in some external reflection
or with reference to some subjective,
that is, accidental, thought.

In the disjunctive judgment,
the concept was posited as the identity of
universal nature and its particularization,
and with that the relation of the judgment was sublated.
This concretion of universality and particularization
is at first a simple result;
it must now further develop itself into totality,
for its moments have at first collapsed into it
and do not as yet stand over against each other
in determinate self-subsistence.
The shortcoming of that result may also be stated
more incisively by saying that
although in the disjunctive judgment
the objective universality has attained completion
in its particularization,
the negative unity of the latter
has only retreated into it
and has not as yet determined itself as the third moment,
that of singularity.
But to the extent that the result is
itself negative unity,
it is already this singularity;
it is then this one determinateness alone
that must now posit its negativity,
that must part itself into extremes
and in this way concludes its development
in the syllogistic conclusion.

The proximate diremption of this unity is
the judgment in which the unity is posited
first as subject,
as an immediate singular,
and then as predicate,
as the determinate connection of its moments.

a. The assertoric judgment

The judgment of the concept is at first immediate;
as such, it is the assertoric judgment.
The subject is a concrete singular in general,
and the predicate expresses this same singular
as the connection of its actuality,
its determinateness or constitution,
to its concept.
(“This house is bad,” “this action is good.”)
More closely considered, it contains, therefore,
(a) that the subject ought to be something;
its universal nature has posited itself as
the self-subsistent concept;
(b) that particularity is something constituted
or an external concrete existence,
not only because of its immediacy,
but because it expressly differs
from its self-subsisting universal nature;
its external concrete existence, for its part,
because of this self-subsistence of the concept,
is also indifferent with respect to the universal
and may or may not conform to it.
This constitution is the singularity
which in the disjunctive judgment escapes
the necessary determination of the universal,
a determination that exists only as
the particularization of the species
and as the negative principle of the genus.
Thus the concrete universality that has come out of
the disjunctive judgment divides in the assertoric judgment
into the form of extremes to which the concept itself,
as the posited unity connecting them, is still lacking.

For this reason the judgment is so far only assertoric;
its credential is only a subjective assurance.
That something is good or bad, right, suitable or not,
hangs on an external third.
But to say that the connectedness is
thus externally posited  is the same as
saying that it is still only in itself or internal.
When we say that something is good or bad, etc.,
we certainly do not mean to say that it is good
only in a subjective consciousness
but may perhaps be bad in itself,
or that “good and bad,” “right,” “suitable,” etc.
may not be predicates of the object itself.
The merely subjective character of
the assertion of this judgment consists,
therefore, in the fact that the implicitly
present connectedness of subject and predicate
has not been posited yet,
or, what amounts to the same thing,
that it is only external;
the copula still is an immediate abstract being.

Thus the assurance of the assertoric judgment can
with right be confronted by an opposing one.
When the assurance is given that
“this action is good,”
the opposite,
“this action is bad,”
has equal justification.
Or, considering the judgment in itself,
since its subject is an immediate singular,
in this abstraction it still does not have,
posited in it, the determinateness
that would contain its connection
with the universal concept;
it still is a contingent matter, therefore,
whether there is or there is not conformity to the concept.
Essentially, therefore, the judgment is problematic.

b. The problematic judgment

The problematic judgment is the assertoric judgment
in so far as the latter must be taken
positively as well as negatively.
According to this qualitative side,
the particular judgment is likewise a problematic one,
for it has positive just as much as negative value
(equally problematic is also the
being of the subject and predicate in the hypothetical judgment),
and also posited through this side is
that the singular judgment and the categorical
are still something merely subjective.
In the problematic judgment as such, however,
this positing is more immanent than it is in these others,
for in it the content of the predicate is
the connection of the subject to the concept;
here, therefore, the determination of the immediate
as something contingent is itself present.

Whether the predicate ought to be
or not to be coupled with a certain subject
appears at first only as problematic,
and to this extent the indeterminateness
falls on the side of the copula.
The predicate has no determination
to gain from this coupling,
since it is already the objective, concrete universality.
The problematic element falls, therefore,
on the immediacy of the subject,
which is thereby determined as a contingency.
But further, we must not for that reason
abstract from the singularity of the subject;
purified of such a singularity,
the subject would be only a universal,
whereas the predicate entails precisely this,
that the concept of the subject ought to be posited
with reference to its singularity.
We may not say, “the house or a house is good,”
but, “so indeed it is in the way it is made.”
The problematic element in the subject itself
constitutes its moment of contingency,
the subjectivity of the fact it expresses
as contrasted with its objective nature or its concept,
its mere mode and manner or its constitution.

Consequently the subject is itself differentiated
into its universality or objective nature, that is, its ought,
and the particularized constitution of immediate existence.
It thereby contains the ground for being or not being
what it ought to be.
In this way, it is equated with the predicate.
Accordingly, the negativity of
the problematic character of the judgment,
inasmuch as it implicates the immediacy of the subject,
only amounts to this original partition of the latter
into its moments of universal and particular
of which it is already the unity,
a partition which is the judgment itself.

One more comment that can be made is
that both sides of the subject,
its concept and the way it is constituted,
could each be called its subjectivity.
The concept is the universal essence of a fact,
withdrawn into itself, the fact's negative self-unity;
this unity constitutes the fact's subjectivity.
But a fact is also essentially contingent
and has an external constitution;
this last may also be called its mere subjectivity,
as contrasted with the objectivity of the concept.
The fact consists just in this, that its concept,
as self-negating unity, negates its universality
and projects itself into the externality of singularity.
As this duplicity, the subject of the judgment is here posited;
the truth of those two opposite meanings of subjectivity is
that they are in one.
The meaning of subjective has itself become problematic
by having lost the immediate determinateness
that it had in the immediate judgment
and its determinate opposition to the predicate.
These opposite meanings of subjectivity
that surface even in the ratiocination of ordinary reflection
should by themselves at least call attention to the fact that
subjectivity has no truth in one of them alone.
The duplicity of meaning is the manifestation
of the one-sidedness of each when taken by itself.

When this problematic character of the judgment
is thus posited as the character of the fact,
the fact with its constitution,
the judgment itself is no longer
problematic but apodictic.

c. The apodictic judgment

The subject of the apodictic judgment
(“the house, as so and so constituted, is good,”
“the action, as so and so constituted, is right”)
includes, first, the universal,
or what it ought to be;
second, its constitution;
the latter contains the ground why a predicate of
the judgment of the concept does or does not pertain to it,
that is, whether the subject corresponds to its concept or not.
This judgment is now truly objective;
or it is the truth of the judgment in general.
Subject and predicate correspond to each other,
and have the same concept,
and this content is itself posited concrete universality;
that is to say, it contains the two moments,
the objective universal or the genus
and the singularized universal.
Here we have, therefore, the universal that is itself
and continues through its opposite,
and is a universal only in unity with the latter.
Such a universal, like “good,” “fitting,” “right,” etc.,
has an ought for its ground,
and contains at the same time
the correspondence of existence;
it is not the ought or the genus by itself,
but this correspondence which is the universality
that constitutes the predicate of the apodictic judgment.

The subject likewise contains
these two moments in immediate unity as fact.
The truth of the latter, however,
is that it is internally fractured
into its ought and its being;
this is the absolute judgment on all actuality.
That this original partition,
which is the omnipotence of the concept,
is equally a turning back into the concept's unity
and the absolute connection of “ought” and “being” to each other,
is what makes the actual into a fact;
the fact's inner connection,
this concrete identity, constitutes its soul.

The transition from the immediate simplicity of the fact
to the correspondence which is the determinate connection
of its ought and its being, the copula,
now shows itself upon closer examination
to lie in the particular determinateness of the fact.
The genus is the universal existing in and for itself
which, to that extent, appears as unconnected;
the determinateness, however, is that
which in that universality is reflected into itself
but at the same time into an other.
The judgment, therefore, has its ground
in the constitution of the subject
and is thereby apodictic.
Consequently, we now have
the determinate and accomplished copula
which hitherto consisted in the abstract “is”
but has now further developed into ground in general.
It first attaches to the subject as immediate determinateness,
but it is equally the connection to the predicate,
a predicate that has no other content than
this correspondence itself,
or the connection of the subject to the universality.

Thus the form of judgment has passed away,
first, because subject and predicate are
in themselves the same content;
but, second, because through its determinateness
the subject points beyond itself
and connects itself to the predicate;
but again, third, this connecting has
equally passed over into the predicate,
only constitutes the content of it,
and so it is the connecting as posited
or the judgment itself.
The concrete identity of the concept
that was the result of the disjunctive judgment
and constitutes the inner foundation of
the judgment of the concept
(the identity that was posited
at first only in the predicate)
is thus recovered in the whole.

On closer examination, the positive factor in this result
which is responsible for the transition of the judgment
into another form is that, as we have just seen,
the subject and predicate are in the apodictic judgment
each the whole concept.
The unity of the concept, as the determinateness
constituting the copula that connects them,
is at the same time distinct from them.
At first, it stands only on
the other side of the subject
as the latter's immediate constitution.
But since its essence is to connect,
it is not only that immediate constitution
but the universal that runs through
the subject and predicate.
While subject and predicate have the same content,
it is the form of their connection
that is instead posited through
the determinateness of the copula,
the determinateness as a universal or the particularity.
Thus it contains in itself both
the form determinations of the extremes
and is the determinate connection of the subject and predicate:
the accomplished copula of the judgment,
the copula replete of content,
the unity of the concept that re-emerges from the judgment
wherein it was lost in the extremes.
By virtue of this repletion of the copula,
the judgment has become syllogism.
