
C. REPULSION AND ATTRACTION

a. Exclusion of the one

The many ones are each a being;
their existence or their reference to one another
is a non-reference, it is external to them:
the abstract void.
But they themselves are now this negative reference
to themselves as to existent others:
the demonstrated contradiction, the infinity posited
in the immediacy of being.
With this, repulsion now finds immediately before it
that which is repelled by it.
In this determination, it is an excluding;
the one repels from itself only the many not generated by it,
the ones not posited by it.
This repelling is mutual or from all sides, relative,
limited by the being of the ones.

Plurality is not at first posited otherness;
limit is only the void, only that in which the ones are not.
But in the limit they also are;
they are in the void,
or their repulsion is their
common connecting reference.

This mutual repulsion is the posited
existence of the many ones;
it is not their being-for-itself,
in accordance with which they would be
distinguished as many only in a third,
but is rather their own distinguishing
which preserves them.
They mutually negate themselves,
posit one another as being only for-one.
But at the same time they negate this
being only for-one just as much;
they repel the ideality that they have and are.
So the moments which in ideality are
absolutely united come apart.
In its being-for-itself, the one is also for-one;
but this one, for which it is, is itself;
its distinguishing from itself is immediately sublated.
But in the plurality the distinguished one has a being;
the being-for-one as has been determined in exclusion
is therefore a being-for-other.
Each thus comes to be repelled by an other,
is sublated and made into a one which is not for itself
but for-one, and an other one at that.

The being-for-itself of the many ones
thus shows itself to be their self-preservation
through the mediation of their mutual repulsion
in which they sublated themselves reciprocally
and posit the others as mere being-for-another.
But the self-preservation consists at the same time
in repelling this ideality and positing the ones
as not being for-an-other.
This self-preservation of the ones
through their negative reference to one another is,
however, rather their dissolution.

The ones not only are but maintain themselves
through their reciprocal exclusion.
First, it is in their being,
and indeed their being-in-itself as
contrasted with their reference to the other,
that they should now have a firm point of support
for their diversity as against their being negated;
this in-itselfness rests on their being ones.
But they all are this;
in their being-in-itself,
instead of having there their
firm point of support for their diversity,
they are all the same.
Second, their existence and their
way of relating to one another,
that is, their positing themselves as one,
is their reciprocal negating;
this, however, is likewise one and the same determination of
all through which they therefore posit themselves as identical;
just as, by being in themselves the same,
the ideality that should be posited in them
through others is their own,
and they thus repel just as little.
According to their being and positing,
they are, consequently, only one affirmative unity.

This consideration regarding the ones:
that from either side of their determination,
whether they just are or refer to one another,
they show themselves to be only one and the same,
indistinguishable, is a comparison that belongs to us.
Also to be seen, therefore, is what is posited in them
in their mutual reference itself.
They are (this much is presupposed in this reference)
and they are only inasmuch as
they negate themselves reciprocally
and at the same time keep away this ideality,
their being negated, from themselves, that is,
they negate the reciprocal negating.
But they are only inasmuch as they negate,
and so, since their reciprocal negating is negated,
their being is negated.
To be sure, since they are,
nothing would be negated through this negating
which for them is only something external;
this negating of the other rebounds off them,
coming their way only by striking their surface.
And yet, they turn back upon themselves
only by negating the others;
they are only as this mediation,
this turning back of theirs is their self-preservation
and their being-for- itself.
Since their negating is ineffectual
because of the resistance offered by the others,
whether as existents or as negating,
they do not return back to themselves,
do not preserve themselves, and so are not.
It was previously remarked that
the ones themselves are each a one like any other.
This is not just a matter of our
connecting them by way of reference,
of bringing them together externally;
repulsion is itself a referring;
the one that excludes the ones refers itself to them,
to the ones, that is, to itself.
The negative relating of the ones to one another is consequently
only a coming-together-with-oneself.
This identity in which their repelling crosses over is
the sublation of their diversity and externality
which they should have rather asserted with respect to
each other by excluding each other.

This self-positing-in-a-one of the many ones is attraction.

b. The one one of attraction

Repulsion is the fragmentation of the one,
first into the many of which
it is the negative relating,
since they presuppose each other as each existent;
it is only the ought of ideality;
this ideality will, however, be realized in attraction.
Repulsion passes over into attraction,
the many ones into one one.
Both, repulsion and attraction, are
at first distinguished from each other,
repulsion as the reality of the ones,
attraction as their posited ideality.
Attraction refers to repulsion
by having it for a presupposition.
Repulsion delivers the material for attraction.
If there were no ones,
there would be nothing to attract;
the representation of continuing attraction,
of the consumption of the ones,
presupposes an equally continuing generation of the ones;
the sense representation of spatial attraction
gives continuity to the flow of ones to be attracted;
to replace the atoms that vanish at the point of attraction,
another multitude comes forth from the void,
infinitely if one so wishes.
If attraction were represented as accomplished, that is,
the many as brought to the point of the one one,
the result would be just an inert one, no longer any attraction.
The ideality immediately present in attraction
still also has in it the determination of the negation of itself,
the many ones to which it refers;
attraction is inseparable from repulsion.

To attract pertains at first in equal measure
to each of the many ones as immediately present;
none has advantage over an other;
what would result then is an equilibrium in the attraction,
or more precisely, an equilibrium in the attraction
and the repulsion themselves, and an inert state of rest
without any ideality present there.
But there can be no question here of
any such immediately present one taking precedence over another,
for this would presuppose a determinate distinction between them;
attraction is rather the positing of
the given lack of distinction among the ones.
Attraction is itself the positing in the first place
of a one distinct from other ones;
these are only the immediate ones
that are to preserve themselves through repulsion;
through their posited negation, however, what proceeds
is the one of attraction
which is therefore determined as the mediated one,
the one posited as one.
The first ones, as immediate, do not in their ideality
return into themselves,
but have this ideality each in another.

The one one is, however,
ideality that has been realized,
posited in the one;
it attracts through the mediation of repulsion;
it contains in itself this mediation as its determination.
It thus does not swallow the attracted ones
within it as into one point, that is,
does not sublate them abstractly.
Since it contains repulsion in its determination,
the latter equally preserves the ones as many within it;
by its attracting, it musters, so to speak,
something before it, gains an area or a filling.
Thus there is in it the unity
of repulsion and attraction in general.

c. The connection of repulsion and attraction

The difference of the one and the many
has determined itself as a difference
of their mutual reference connecting them
which breaks down into two, repulsion and attraction,
each of which stands at first
outside the other on its own,
in such a way that the two are
essentially joined together nevertheless.
Their still indeterminate unity
must be brought out in greater detail.

As the fundamental determination of the one,
repulsion appears first, and it appears as immediate,
like its ones which are indeed generated by it
and yet are at the same time posited as immediate,
and it is therefore indifferent to the attraction
which is added to it externally as thus presupposed.
Rather, attraction is not presupposed by repulsion:
it is not supposed to have any part in the positing
and in the being of the latter, that is,
as if repulsion were not, already in it,
the negation of itself,
or the ones were not already negated in it.
In this way, we have repulsion in abstraction, by itself,
and attraction likewise holds out to the ones,
as each an existent, the side of an immediate existence
which comes to them by itself as an other.

If we take mere repulsion in this way, for itself,
it is then the dispersion of the many ones in indeterminacy,
outside the sphere of repulsion itself;
for repulsion is the negating of the connection
of the many to one another;
lack of connection is their determination when abstractly taken.
But repulsion is not just the void;
the ones, although unconnected,
do not repel what constitutes their determination,
do not exclude it.
Although negative, repulsion is nonetheless essentially connection;
the mutual repulsion and flight is not a liberation
from what is repelled and fled from;
that which is excluded still stands in connection
with what is excluded from it.
But this moment of connection is attraction,
which is thus within repulsion itself;
it is the negating of that abstract repulsion
by which the ones would each be an existent
referring only to itself without mutual exclusion.

But in starting with the repulsion
of the ones as immediately present there,
and with attraction consequently also posited
as intruding on them externally,
the two, repulsion and attraction,
are held apart as diverse
determinations despite their inseparability.
But it has been established that it is not
just repulsion which is presupposed by attraction,
but that there equally is present also
a reverse connection of repulsion to attraction,
and that repulsion no less has
attraction for its presupposition.

As thus determined, they are inseparable,
and at the same time each is determined
as an ought and a limitation with respect to the other.
Their ought is their abstract determinateness
as each an existent in itself,
a determinateness, however, which is thereby
directed beyond itself and refers to the other.
And so, through the mediation of the other, each is as other;
their self-subsistence consists in their being mutually posited
in this mediation as an other determining.
Thus, repulsion is the positing of the many;
attraction the positing of the one;
this latter is equally the negation of the many
and the former the negation of the ideality
of such a many in the one;
so that attraction too is attraction only through
the mediation of repulsion,
just as repulsion is repulsion
through the mediation of attraction.
In all this, however, the mediation of each with itself
through the other is in fact negated;
each of the two determinations is its own self-mediation.
This will result from a closer examination of the two determinations
and will bring us back to the unity of their concept.

In the first place, that each presupposes itself,
that in its presupposition each refers only to itself,
this is already present in the way the still relative
repulsion and attraction behave at first.

Relative repulsion is the mutual repulsion
of many ones which are already at hand,
supposedly immediately given.
But that there be many ones,
this is repulsion itself;
any presupposition that it would have is
only its own positing.
Moreover, the determination of the being
that would accrue to the ones
apart from their being posited
(whereby they would already be)
belongs likewise to repulsion.
Repelling is that through which
the ones manifest themselves
and maintain themselves as ones;
through which they are as such.
Their being is their repulsion itself,
which is thus not some relative
existence against another other
but relates itself throughout only to itself.

Attraction is the positing of the one as such,
of the real one, with respect to which
the existence of the many is determined
as only a vanishing idealization.
Attraction thus directly presupposes itself;
it presupposes itself in the determination namely,
of the many ones to be an idealization,
the same ones which are otherwise supposed
to have existence for themselves and to repel others,
including therefore any other that attracts.
Against this determination of repulsion,
the ones do not attain ideality only through
the relation to attraction;
on the contrary, the ideality is presupposed:
it is the ideality of the ones
as an existent in itself,
inasmuch as they, as ones
(including the one conceived as attracting),
are not distinguished from one another
but are one and the same.

This self-presupposing of the two determinations, each for itself,
implies further that each contains within itself the other as moment.
Self-presupposing in general is the positing of oneself
in a one as the negative of oneself (repulsion),
and what is presupposed in this positing is
the same as that which presupposes (attraction).
That each is in itself only a moment,
this is the transition of each from itself into the other,
the negation of itself in the other
and the positing of itself as the other of itself.
The one, as such, is thus a coming-out-of-itself;
is itself only the positing of itself as its other, as the many.
And the many, for its part, is
only the falling back upon itself
and the positing of itself as its other, as a one,
and is in this equally only the connecting of itself to itself,
each continuing itself in its other.
Therefore, the coming-out-of-itself (repulsion)
and the self-positing-as-one (attraction)
are already inherently present as undivided.
But in the repulsion and attraction which are relative, that is,
which presuppose immediate, determinedly existent ones,
it is posited that the two are each, within it, this negation of itself,
and consequently also the continuity of itself in its other.
The repulsion of the determinedly existent ones is
the self-preservation of the one
through the mutual holding off of the others,
so that (1) the other ones are negated in it
(this is the side of its existence or of its being-for-another
and is therefore attraction as the ideality of the ones);
and (2) the one is in itself,
without reference to the others
(however, not only has the in-itself in general
long since passed over into being-for-itself;
the one in itself, according to its determination,
is the coming to be of many).
The attraction of the existent ones is their ideality
and the positing of the one, and in this,
as both the negating and the producing of the one,
attraction sublates itself,
and as a positing within it of the one,
is the negative of itself:
it is repulsion.
