
C. THE JUDGMENT OF NECESSITY

The determination to which universality has advanced is,
as we have seen, the universality
that exists in and for itself
or the objective universality that
in the sphere of essence corresponds to substantiality.
It is distinguished from the latter
because it belongs to the concept
and for this reason is not only the inner
but also the posited necessity of its determinations,
or in other words, the distinction is immanent to it,
whereas substance has its distinction only in its accidents,
does not have it as a principle within it.

In the judgment now, this objective universality is posited,
first, posited with this determinateness
as essential to it, immanent to it;
second, posited with it as diverse from it,
a particularity for which the said universality
constitutes the substantial basis.
In this way the universality is determined
as genus and species.

a. The categorical judgment

The genus essentially divides
or repels itself into species;
it is genus only in so far as
it comprehends the species under it;
the species is a species only in so far as,
on the one side, it exists in singulars,
and, on the other side, it possesses
in the genus a higher universality.
Now the categorical judgment has
for predicate such a universality
as in it the subject possesses its immanent nature.
But the categorical judgment is itself
the first or the immediate judgment of necessity;
consequently, the determinateness of the subject,
by virtue of which the latter is a singular
as contrasted to the genus or the species,
belongs to the immediacy of external concrete existence.
But objective universality also has here
only its first immediate particularization;
on the one hand, therefore,
it is itself a determinate genus
with respect to which there are higher genera;
on the other hand, it is not the most proximate genus,
that is, its determinateness is not directly the
principle of the specific particularity of the subject.
But what is necessary in it is
the substantial identity of subject and predicate,
in view of which the distinguishing mark of each is
only an unessential positedness or even only a name;
in its predicate, the subject is
reflected into its being-in-and-for-itself.
Such a predicate ought not to be classed
with the predicates of the preceding judgments.
For example, to throw together into one class
these judgments:

The rose is red,
The rose is a plant,
or This ring is yellow,
It is gold,

and thus to take such an external property
as the color of a flower
as a predicate equal to its vegetable nature,
is to overlook a difference which
the dullest mind would not miss.
The categorical judgment, therefore, is
definitely to be distinguished from
the positive and the negative judgment;
in these, what is said of the subject is
a singular accidental content;
in the former, the content is
the totality of the form reflected into itself.
In this content, therefore, the copula has
the meaning of necessity,
whereas in that of the other two it has only
the meaning of abstract, immediate being.

The determinateness of the subject,
which makes it a particular
with respect to the predicate,
is at first still something contingent;
subject and predicate are not connected
with necessity by the form or the determinateness;
the necessity is therefore still an inner one.
The subject is subject, however, only as a particular,
and to the extent that it possesses objective universality,
it has to possess it essentially in accordance with
that at first immediate determinateness.
The objective universal, in determining itself,
that is, in positing itself in a judgment,
is in a connection of identity with this repelled
determinateness as such, essentially,
that is, this determinateness is not to
be posited as merely accidental.
Only through this necessity of its immediate being
does the categorical judgment conform
to its objective universality
and, in this way, has passed over
into the hypothetical judgment.

b. The hypothetical judgment

“If A is, then B is”;
or “The being of A is not its own being
but the being of an other, of B.”
What is posited in this judgment is
the necessary connectedness of immediate determinacies,
a connectedness which in the categorical judgment
is not yet posited.
There are here two immediate,
or externally contingent concrete existences,
of which in the categorical judgment
there is at first only one, the subject;
but since one is external to the other,
this other is immediately also external
with respect to the first.
On account of this immediacy,
the contents of both sides are still
indifferent to each other;
at first, therefore, this judgment is
a proposition of empty form.
Now, first, the immediacy is as such
indeed self-subsistent, a concrete being;
but, second, what is essential is its connection;
this being is therefore just as much mere possibility;
the hypothetical judgment does not say
either that A is, or that B is,
but only that if the one is, then the other is;
only the connectedness of the extremes is
posited as existing, not the extremes themselves.
Indeed, each extreme is posited in this necessity
as equally the being of an other.
The principle of identity asserts that
A is only A, not B;
and B is only B, not A.
In the hypothetical judgment, on the contrary,
the being of finite things is posited through the concept
in accordance with their formal truth,
namely that the finite is its own being,
but equally is not its own being
but is the being of an other.
In the sphere of being,
the finite alters and comes to be an other.
In the sphere of essence,
it is appearance;
its being is posited to consist in
the reflective shining of an other in it,
and the necessity is the inner connection
not yet posited as such.
But the concept is this:
that this identity is posited;
that the existent is not abstract self-identity
but concrete self-identity
and is, immediately within it,
the being of an other.

The hypothetical judgment can be more closely determined
in terms of the relations of reflection as
a relation of ground and consequence,
condition and conditioned, causality etc.
Just as substantiality is present in the
categorical judgment in the form of its concept,
so is the connectedness of causality
in the hypothetical judgment.
This and the other relations all recur in it,
but they are there essentially only as moments of
one and the same identity.
However, in it they are as yet not opposed as
singular or particular and universal
according to the determinations of the concept,
but are only as moments in general at first.
The hypothetical judgment, therefore, has a shape
which is more that of a proposition;
just as the particular judgment is of indeterminate content,
so is the hypothetical of indeterminate form,
for the determination of its content does not conform
to the relation of subject and predicate.
Yet the being, since it is the being of the other,
is for that very reason in itself
the unity of itself and the other,
and therefore universality;
by the same token it is in fact only a particular,
for it is a determinate being
and does not refer in its determinateness merely to itself.
But it is not the simple, abstract particularity that is posited;
on the contrary, through the immediacy
which the determinacies possess,
the moments of particularity are differentiated;
at the same time, through the unity of these moments
as constituted by their connection,
the particularity is also their totality.
In truth, therefore, what is posited in this judgment is
universality as the concrete identity of the concept
whose determinations do not have any subsistence of their own
but are only particularities posited in that identity.
So it is the disjunctive judgment.

c. The disjunctive judgment

In the categorical judgment, the concept is
objective universality and an external singularity.
In the hypothetical, the concept manifests its presence
in this externality, in its negative identity.
Through this identity, the objective universality
and the external singularity obtain the determinateness,
now posited in the disjunctive judgment,
which in the hypothetical they possess immediately.
Hence the disjunctive judgment is objective universality
at the same time posited in union with the form.
It thus contains,
first, the concrete universality
or the genus in simple form, as the subject;
second, the same universality
but as the totality of its differentiated determinations.
“A is either B or C.”
This is the necessity of the concept in which,
first, the self-identity of the two extremes is
of the same extent, content, and universality.
Second, they are differentiated according
to the form of conceptual determination,
but, because of that identity,
this determination is a mere form.
Third, the identical objective universality appears
for that reason reflected into itself
as against the non-essential form,
as a content which however has the determinateness of form in it,
once as the simple determination of genus;
then again, as this determinateness developed in its difference,
and in this way it is the particularity of the species
and their totality, the universality of the genus.
The particularity constitutes in its development the predicate,
because, in containing the whole universal
sphere of the subject, and in containing it,
however, also in the articulation of particularity,
it is to that extent the greater universal.

Upon closer consideration of this particularization,
it is the genus that constitutes first of all
the substantial universality of the species;
the subject is thus B as well as C;
this “as well as” indicates the positive identity of
the particular with the universal;
this objective universal maintains itself
fully in its particularity.
Secondly, the species mutually exclude one another;
“A is either B or C”;
for they are the specific difference of the universal sphere.
This “either or” is their negative connection.
In this negative connection
they are just as identical as in the positive;
the genus is their unity as
a unity of determinate particulars.
If the genus were an abstract universality,
as in the judgments of existence,
then the species would also have to
be taken as diverse and mutually indifferent;
this universality, however, is
not the external one that arises only
through comparison and abstraction
but is, on the contrary, the universality
which is immanent to the genus and concrete.
An empirical disjunctive judgment is without necessity;
A is either B or C or D, etc.,
because the species B, C, D, etc.,
are found beforehand;
strictly speaking, therefore, there is
no question here of an “either or,”
for the completeness of these species is only a subjective one;
of course, one species excludes the other,
but the “either or” excludes
every other species and excludes within itself an entire sphere.
This totality has its necessity in
the negative unity of the objective universal
which has dissolved singularity within itself
and possesses, immanent in it,
the simple principle of differentiation
by which the species are determined and connected.
The empirical species, on the contrary,
have their differences in some accidentality
or other which is a principle external to them
and is not, therefore, their principle,
and consequently also not the immanent
determinateness of the genus;
for this reason, they are also not reciprocally
connected according to their determinateness.
Yet it is by virtue of their determinateness
that the species constitute the universality of the predicate.
Here is where the so-called
contrary and contradictory concepts
should find their proper place,
for the disjunctive judgment is
where the essential difference of the concept is posited;
but here they also equally find their truth,
namely that contrariness and contradictoriness are themselves
differentiated both as contraries and as contradictory.
Species are contrary inasmuch as they are merely diverse,
that is to say, inasmuch as they possess an immediate existence
as subsisting in and for themselves by virtue of
the genus which is their nature.
They are contradictory, inasmuch as they exclude one another.
But each of these determinations is
by itself one-sided and void of truth.
In the “either or” of the disjunctive judgment,
their unity is posited as their truth,
which is that the independent subsistence of
the species as concrete universality is
itself also the principle of the negative unity
by which they mutually exclude one another.

Through the identity just demonstrated of
subject and predicate in accordance
with the negative unity,
the genus is determined in the disjunctive judgment
as the proximate genus.
This expression indicates at first
the mere quantitative difference of
the more or less determinations
which a universal contains as contrasted to
a particularity coming under it.
On this account, which is the
truly proximate genus remains contingent.
But then, if the genus is taken as a universal
arrived at by the mere abstraction of determinations,
it cannot strictly speaking form a disjunctive judgment;
for it is contingent whether, as it were,
there is still left in it the determinateness
that constitutes the principle of the “either or”;
the genus would not be displayed in the species
according to its determinateness,
and these would only be capable of contingent completeness.
In the categorical judgment, the genus stands at first
over against the subject only in this abstract form,
is not, therefore, necessarily its proximate genus
and, to this extent, is external to it.
But when the genus is a concrete,
essentially determined universality,
then, as simple determinateness,
it is the unity of the moments of the concept;
moments that, only sublated in that simplicity,
have their real difference in the species.
Hence the genus is the proximate genus of a species,
for the latter possesses its specific difference
in the essential determinateness of the genus,
and the species have as such the determination
differentiating them in the nature of the genus.

What we have just considered constitutes
the identity of subject and predicate
from the aspect of determinateness in general.
This is an aspect that was posited by the hypothetical judgment,
the necessity of which is an identity of immediate and diverse things
and is, therefore, essentially a negative unity.
It is this negative unity that in principle
separates subject and predicate
but is now posited as itself differentiated –
in the subject, as simple determinateness;
in the predicate, as totality.
That parting of subject and predicate is
the difference of the concept;
the totality of the species in the predicate can
then be none other than this difference.
The reciprocal determination of the disjunctive terms is
therefore hereby given.
It reduces to the difference of the concept,
for it is the concept alone that disjoins itself
and manifests in its determination its negative unity.
Of course, the species comes up for consideration here only under the
aspect of its simple conceptual determinateness, not according to the shape
in which, proceeding from the idea,
it steps into a further self-subsistent reality.
This reality is of course dropped in the simple principle of the genus;
but the essential differentiation must be a moment of the concept.
In the judgment here considered, it is really now
the concept's own progressive determination
that itself posits its disjunction,
just as was the case for the concept itself,
as we saw when it was determined in and for itself
and was differentiated into determinate concepts.
Now because the concept is the universal,
the positive as well as the negative totality of the particulars,
for that reason it is immediately itself also
one of its disjunctive members;
the other member, however, is
this universality resolved into its particularity,
or the determinateness of the concept as determinateness,
in which the very universality displays itself as totality.
If the disjunction of a genus into species has
not yet attained this form,
this is proof that the disjunction has not risen
to the determinateness of the concept
and has not proceeded from it.
Color is either violet, indigo, blue, green, yellow, orange, or red;
even empirically, the confusion and impurity of
such a disjunction are at once apparent;
it is a barbarism even from this standpoint.
If color is conceived as the concrete
unity of light and darkness,
then this genus has within it the determinateness
that constitutes the principle of
its particularization into species.
Of these, however, one must be the utterly simple color
that holds the opposition in balance,
contained and negated in the color's intensity;
the relation of the opposition of light and darkness
must then take its place over against it,
and, since this relation is a natural phenomenon,
the indifferent neutrality of the opposition must be further added to it.
Taking for genus such mixtures as violet, and orange,
or shades of difference like indigo blue and light blue,
betrays a totally inconsiderate procedure
that shows too little reflection even for empiricism.
But this is not the place to discuss the different
and more finely determined forms that disjunction
may indeed assume in the element of nature or spirit.

In the first instance, the disjunctive judgment has
the members of the disjunction in the predicate.
But the judgment is itself equally disjoined;
its subject and predicate are the members of the disjunction;
they are the moments of the concept
posited in their determinateness
but at the same time as identical;
identical, (a) in the objective universality
which is in the subject as the simple genus,
and in the predicate as the universal sphere
and totality of the moments of the concept;
and (b) in the negative unity,
the developed connectedness of necessity,
in accordance with which the simple determinateness
in the subject has fallen apart
into the difference of the species
and these, in this very difference,
have their essential connection and self-identity.

This unity, the copula of this judgment
in which the extremes have come together
through their identity,
is thus the concept itself,
indeed the concept as posited;
the mere judgment of necessity has
thereby risen to the judgment of the concept.
