JUDGMENT OF REFLECTION

In the judgment that has now arisen,
the subject is a singular as such;
and similarly, the universal is
no longer an abstract universality,
or a singular property,
but is posited as a universal
that has collected itself together
into a unity through the connection of different terms,
or, regarded from the standpoint of the content
of diverse determinations in general,
as the coalescing of
manifold properties and concrete existences.
If examples of predicates
of judgments of reflection are to be given,
they must be of another kind
than for the judgments of existence.
It is only in the judgment of reflection
that we first have a determinate content strictly speaking,
that is, a content as such;
for the content is the form determination
reflected into identity as distinct from the form
in so far as  this is a distinct determinateness
as it still is as judgment.
In the judgment of existence,
the content is merely an immediate,
or abstract, indeterminate content.
These may therefore serve as examples
of judgments of reflection:
the human being is mortal,
things are perishable,
this thing is useful, harmful;
hardness, elasticity of bodies, happiness, etc.,
are predicates of this particular kind.
They express an essentiality
which is however a relational determination,
or a comprehensive universality.
This universality, which will further determine
itself in the movement of the judgment of reflection,
is still distinct from the universality
of the concept as such;
although it is no longer
the abstract universality of the qualitative judgment,
it still has a connection to the immediate
from which it proceeds
and has the latter at the basis of its negativity.
The concept determines immediate existence,
in the first instance,
to relational determinations that extend
across the diverse multiplicity of concrete existence,
so that the true universal is indeed
the inner essence of that multiplicity,
but is such in the sphere of appearance,
and this relative nature or even its mark
is not as yet the element of the multiplicity
that exists in and for itself.

It may seem fitting to define the
judgment of reflection as a judgment of quantity,
just as the judgment of existence was defined
also as qualitative judgment.
But just as the immediacy in the latter was not just there,
but was an immediacy which is also essentially mediated and abstract,
so, here also, that same immediacy which is now sublated
is not just sublated quality,
and therefore not merely quantity;
on the contrary, just as quality is
the most external immediacy,
so is quantity, in the same way,
the most external determination
belonging to mediation.

Also to be noted concerning the determination as it appears
in the movement of the judgment of reflection is
that, in the judgment of immediate existence,
the movement of the determination showed itself in the predicate,
for this kind of judgment was in  the determination
of immediacy and its subject,
therefore, appeared as the underlying basis.
For a similar reason, in the judgment of reflection
the onward movement of determination runs
its course in the subject,
for this judgment has the reflected in-itselfness
for its determination.
Hence the essential is here the universal or the predicate,
and it is the latter, therefore,
that constitutes the basis against which
the subject is to be measured and determined accordingly.
Yet the predicate also receives a further determination
through the further development of the form of the subject,
but it receives it indirectly,
whereas the progression of the subject manifests itself,
for the reason just given,
as a direct advance in determination.

As regards the objective signification of the judgment,
the singular enters into existence by virtue of its universality,
but it does so in an essential determination which is relational,
in an essentiality that maintains itself across the manifold of appearance;
the subject is supposed to be that which is determined in and for itself;
this is the determinateness which it has in its predicate.
The singular, for its part, is reflected into this predicate
which is its universal essence;
to this extent, the subject is a concrete existence
and a phenomenal something.
In this judgment, the predicate no longer inheres in the subject,
for it is rather the implicit being under which the singular
subject is subsumed as an accidental.
If the judgments of existence can also
be defined as judgments of inherence,
then the judgments of reflection are
by contrast judgments of subsumption.

a. The singular judgment

Now the immediate judgment of reflection is again,
“the singular is universal,”
but with the subject and predicate
in the signification just explained.
More accurately, therefore,
it can also be expressed thus,
“this is an essential universal.”

But a “this” is not an essential universal.
That positive judgment
(positive according to form must
as judgment be taken negatively.
But inasmuch as the judgment of reflection is
not merely something positive,
the negation does not directly affect the predicate)
a predicate which does not inhere in the subject
but is rather its implicit being.
On the contrary, it is the subject
that is alterable and needs determination.
The negative judgment is therefore
to be understood as saying:
“'not a this' is a universal of reflection”;
such an in-itself has a more universal concrete existence
than it would have in a “this.”
Accordingly, the singular judgment has
its proximate truth in the particular judgment.

b. The particular judgment

The non-singularity of the subject
that must be posited in the first judgment of reflection
instead of the subject's singularity is particularity.
But particularity is determined in the judgment of reflection
as essential singularity;
particularity cannot be, therefore,
a simple, abstract determination
in which the singular would be sublated
and the concrete existent dissolved,
but is rather only an extension of
this singular in external reflection.
Thus the subject is: “these ones,”
or “a particular number of singulars.”

The judgment, “some singulars are a universal of reflection,”
appears at first to be a positive judgment,
but it is just as well also negative;
for “some” contains universality
and may, accordingly, be regarded as comprehensive;
but since it is particularity,
it is equally disproportionate
with respect to universality.
The negative determination which the subject has obtained
through the transition of the singular judgment also is,
as we have shown above, the determination
of the connection, the copula.
Implicated in the judgment,
“some humans are happy,”
is the immediate consequence:
“some humans are not happy.”
When some things are useful,
then, precisely for that reason,
there also are some that are not useful.
The positive and the negative judgment
no longer fall outside one another,
but the particular immediately contains both at the same time,
precisely because it is a judgment of reflection.
But the particular judgment is therefore indeterminate.

If, in the example of such a judgment,
we consider further the subject,
“some humans,” “some animals,” etc.,
we find that it contains,
besides the particular form determination of “some,”
also the content determination of “humans,” etc.
By the subject of the singular judgment one could mean,
“this human,” a singularity that properly pertains to external pointing;
it would best be expressed, therefore, by something like “Gaius.”
But the subject of the particular judgment
can no longer be “some Gaiuses,”
for Gaius is supposed to be a singular as singular.
To the “some,” therefore, there is added a more universal content,
say “humans,” “animals,” etc.
This is not a mere empirical content,
but one which is determined by the form of the judgment;
it is universal, that is, because “some” contains universality,
and the latter must at the same time be separated
from the singulars which the reflected singularity has as a basis.
More precisely, this universality is also the universal nature
or species “human,” “animal”
the universality which is the result of
the judgment of reflection, but anticipated;
just as the positive judgment,
since it has the singular for subject,
also anticipates the determination
which is the result of the judgment of existence.

Thus the subject that contains the singulars,
their connection to particularity,
and the universal nature,
is already posited as the totality of
the determinations of the concept.
But, to be precise, this consideration is an external one.
What is at first already posited in the subject
by virtue of its form, in reciprocal connection,
is the extension of the “this” to particularity;
but this generalization is not commensurate to the “this”;
the latter is perfectly determinate,
but “some” is indeterminate.
The extension ought to be appropriate to the “this”
and therefore, in conformity with it,
it ought to be completely determined;
such an extension is totality,
or, in the first instance,
universality in general.

This universality has the “this” for its basis,
for the singular is here the singular reflected into itself;
its further determinations run their course,
therefore, outside it, and just as for this reason
particularity determined itself as a “some,”
so the universality which the subject has attained
is an “allness,” and thus the particular judgment
has passed over into the universal.

c. The universal judgment

The universality of the subject of the universal judgment is
the external universality of reflection, “allness”;
the “all” is the all of all the singulars
in which the singular remains unchanged.
This universality is therefore only
a commonality of self-subsisting singulars,
an association of such singulars
as comes about only by way of comparison.
This is the association that first comes to mind
at a subjective level of representation
when there is talk of universality.
The most obvious reason given for viewing a determination
as universal is because it fits many.
Also in analysis is this conception of universality
the one most prevalent, as when, for instance,
the development of a function in a polynomial is
taken to have greater universal value than
its development in a binomial,
because the polynomial displays
more single terms than the binomial.
The demand that the function should be resolved
in its full universality would require, strictly speaking,
a pantonomial, the exhausted infinity.
But here is where the limitation of
that demand becomes apparent,
and where the display of the infinite number of terms
must rest satisfied with the ought it commands,
and therefore also with a polynomial.
But in fact the binomial is already the pantonomial
in those cases where the method or the rule concerns
only the dependence of one member on another,
and the dependence of several terms on
those that precede them does not particularize itself
but remains one and the same underlying function.
It is the method or the rule
which is to be regarded as the true universal;
in the progress of the development
or in the development of a polynomial,
the rule is only repeated,
so that it gains nothing in universality
through the increased number of terms.
We have already spoken earlier of
the bad infinity and its deception;
the universality of the concept is the achieved beyond,
whereas that bad infinity remains afflicted with a beyond
which is unattainable but remains a mere progression to infinity.
If it is allness that universality brings to mind,
a universality that ought to be exhausted in singulars as singulars,
then there has been a relapse into that bad infinity;
or else it is mere plurality which is taken for allness.
But plurality, however great it might be,
remains inescapably only particularity:
it is not allness.
Yet there is in all this an obscure intimation of
the universality of the concept
as it exists in and for itself;
it is the concept that violently strives
to reach beyond the stubborn singularity
to which pictorial representation clings
and beyond the externality of its reflection,
passing off allness as totality
or rather as the category of the in-and-for-itself.

This is apparent in other ways as well in the allness
which is above all empirical universality.
Inasmuch as the singular is presupposed as something immediate
and is therefore pre-given and externally picked,
the reflection which collects it into an allness is
equally external to it.
But because the singular, as a “this,” is
absolutely indifferent to such a reflection,
the universality and the collected singularity
cannot combine to form a unity.
The empirical allness thus remains a task;
it is an ought which, as such,
cannot be represented  in the form of being.
Now an empirically universal proposition,
for nevertheless such are advanced,
rests on the tacit agreement that,
if no instance of the contrary can be adduced,
a plurality of cases ought to count for an allness;
or that a subjective allness,
namely the known cases,
may be taken for an objective allness.

Now a closer examination of
the universal judgment before us shows
that the subject, as we have just noted,
contains the achieved universality as presupposed;
it even contains it as posited in it.
“All humans” expresses, first, the species “human”;
second, this species in its singularization,
but in such a way that the singulars are at the same time
expanded to the universality of the species;
conversely, through this conjunction with singularity,
the universality is just as perfectly determined as singularity,
and the posited universality has thereby
become equal to what was presupposed.

But, strictly speaking, we should not anticipate the presupposed
but should rather consider the result for itself
in the form determination.
The singularity, inasmuch as it is expanded to allness,
is posited as negativity,
and this is identical self-reference.
It has not remained, therefore, that first singularity
(of Gaius, for instance)
but is a determination identical with universality,
or the absolute determinateness of the universal.
That first singularity of the singular judgment was not
the immediate singularity of the positive judgment,
but came about through the dialectical movement of
the judgment of existence in general;
it was already determined to be the negative identity of
the determinations of that judgment.
This is the true presupposition in the judgment of reflection;
as contrasted to the positing that runs its course in that judgment,
that first determinatenessof singularity was the latter's in-itself;
consequently, what singularity is in itself,
through the movement of the judgment of reflection is now posited,
posited, that is, as the identical self-reference of the determinate.
Therefore the reflection that expanded
the singularity to allness is not external to it;
on the contrary, it only makes explicit what was before implicit.
Hence the result is in truth the objective universality.
The subject has thus shed the form determination of the judgment of reflection
that made its way from the “this” to the “allness” through the “some.”
Instead of “all humans,” we now have to say “the human being.”

The universality that has thereby arisen is the genus,
or the universality which is concrete in its universality.
The genus does not inhere in the subject;
it is not one property of it or a property at all;
it contains all singular determinacies
dissolved into its substantial purity.
Because it is thus posited as this negative self-identity,
it is for that reason essentially subject,
but one that is no longer subsumed under its predicate.
Consequently the nature of the judgment of reflection is
now altogether altered.

This judgment was essentially a judgment of subsumption.
The predicate was determined, in contrast to its subject,
as the implicit universal;
according to its content, it could be taken as an
essentially relational determination
or also as a mark,
a determination which makes the subject
essentially only an appearance.
But when determined to objective universality,
the subject ceases to be subsumed
under such a relational determination
or the collecting grasp of reflection;
with respect to this objective universality,
a predicate of this sort is rather a particular.
The relation of subject and predicate
has thus reversed itself,
and to this extent the judgment has
at this point sublated itself.

This sublation of the judgment coincides
with what the determination of the copula becomes,
as we still have to consider;
the sublation of the determinations of judgment
and their transition into the copula are one and same.
For inasmuch as the subject has raised itself to universality,
it has become in this determination equal to the predicate
which, as the reflected universality,
also contains particularity within itself;
subject and predicate are therefore identical, that is,
in the copula they have come to coincide.
This identity is the genus
or the nature of a thing in and for itself.
Inasmuch as this identity, therefore, again divides,
it is the inner nature by virtue of which
a subject and predicate are connected to each other.
This is a connection of necessity
wherein the two terms of the judgment are only
unessential distinctions.
That what belongs to all the singulars of a genus
belongs to the genus by nature,
is an immediate consequence.
It expresses what we have just seen;
that the subject, e.g. “all humans,”
sheds its form determination
and “the human being” is what it should say instead.
This combination, implicit and explicit,
constitutes the basis of a new judgment,
the judgment of necessity.
