
CHAPTER 1

Life

The idea of life has to do with
a subject matter so concrete,
and if you will so real,
that in dealing with it one may seem
according to the common notion of logic
to have overstepped its boundaries.
Needless to say, if the logic were to contain
nothing but empty, dead forms of thought,
then there could be no talk in it at all
of such a content as the idea, or life, are.
But if the subject matter of logic is the absolute truth,
and truth as such lies essentially in cognition,
then cognition at least would have to come in for consideration.
It is common practice to have the so-called pure logic
be followed by an applied logic,
a logic that has to do with concrete cognition,
quite apart from all the psychology and anthropology
that is commonly deemed necessary to interpolate into logic.
But the anthropological and psychological side of
cognition is concerned with the form in which cognition appears
when the concept does not as yet have an objectivity equal to it,
that is, when it does not have itself as object.
The part of the logic that deals with this
concrete cognition does not belong to applied logic as such;
if it did, then every science would have to be dragged into logic,
for each is an applied logic in so far as
it consists in apprehending its subject matter
in forms of thought and of concepts.
The subjective concept has presuppositions
that are exhibited in psychological, anthropological, and other forms.
But the presuppositions of the pure concept
belong in logic only to the extent that
they have the form of pure thoughts, of abstract essentialities,
such as are the determinations of being and essence.
The same goes for cognition,
which is the concept's comprehension of itself:
no other shape of its presupposition
but the one which is itself idea
is to be dealt with in the logic;
this, however, is a presupposition
which is necessarily treated in logic.
This presupposition is now the immediate idea;
for while cognition is the concept,
in so far as the latter exists for itself
but as a subjectivity referring to an objectivity,
then the concept refers to the idea
as presupposed or as immediate.
But the immediate idea is life.

To this extent the necessity of considering
the idea of life in logic would be based on
the necessity, itself recognized in other ways,
of treating the concrete concept.
But this idea has arisen through the concept's own necessity;
the idea, that which is true in and for itself,
is essentially the subject matter of the logic;
since it is first to be considered in its immediacy,
so that this treatment be not
an empty affair devoid of determination,
it is to be apprehended and cognized
in this determinateness in which it is life.
A comment may be in order here to
differentiate the logical view of life
from any other scientific view of it,
though this is not the place to concern
ourselves with how life is treated in non-philosophical sciences
but only with how to differentiate logical life as idea
from natural life as treated in the philosophy of nature,
and from life in so far as it is bound to spirit.
As treated in the philosophy of nature,
as the life of nature and to that extent
exposed to the externality of existence,
life is conditioned by inorganic nature
and its moments as idea are a manifold of actual shapes.
Life in the idea is without such presuppositions,
which are in shapes of actuality;
its presupposition is the concept
as we have considered it,
on the one hand as subjective,
and on the other hand as objective.
In nature life appears as the highest stage
that nature's externality can attain
by withdrawing into itself
and sublating itself in subjectivity.
It is in logic the simple in-itselfness
which in the idea of life has attained
the externality truly corresponding to it;
the concept that came on the scene earlier as
a subjective concept is the soul of life itself;
it is the impulse that gives itself reality
through a process of objectification.
Nature, as it reaches this idea
starting from its externality, transcends itself;
its end is not its beginning but is for it
as a limit in which it sublates itself.
Similarly, in the idea of life
the moments of life's reality do not
receive the shape of external actuality
but remain enveloped in conceptual form.

In spirit, however, life appears
both as opposed to it and as posited as at one with it,
in a unity reborn as the pure product of spirit.
For life is here to be taken generally in
its proper sense as natural life,
for what is called the life of spirit as spirit,
is spirit's own peculiar nature
that stands opposed to mere life;
just as we speak of the nature of spirit,
even though spirit is nothing natural
but stands rather in opposition to nature.
Thus life as such is for spirit in one respect a means,
and then spirit holds it over against itself;
in another respect, spirit is an individual,
and then life is its body;
in yet another respect, this unity of spirit
and its living corporeality is
born of spirit into ideality.
None of these connections of life to spirit
concerns logical life,
and life is to be considered here
neither as the instrument of a spirit,
nor as a living body,
nor again as a moment of the ideal and of beauty.
In both cases, as natural life and as referring to spirit,
life obtains a determinateness from its externality,
in one case through its presuppositions,
such as are other formations of nature,
and in the other case through the
purposes and the activity of spirit.
The idea of life by itself is free
from both the conditioning objectivity
presupposed in the first case
and the reference to subjectivity
of the second case.

Life, considered now more closely in its idea,
is in and for itself absolute universality;
the objectivity which it possesses is
throughout permeated by the concept,
and this concept alone it has as substance.
Whatever is distinguished as part,
or by some otherwise external reflection,
has the whole concept within it;
the concept is the soul omnipresent in it,
a soul which is simple self-reference
and remains one in the manifoldness
that accrues to the objective being.
This manifoldness, as self-external objectivity,
has an indifferent subsistence which in space and time,
if these could already be mentioned here,
is a mutual externality of entirely
diverse and atomistic matters.
But externality is in life at the same time
as the simple determinateness of its concept;
thus the soul flows omnipresently in this manifold
but remains at the same time the simple oneness
of the concrete concept with itself.
That way of thinking that clings to the determinations of
reflective relations and of the formal concept,
when it comes to consider life,
the unity of its concept in the externality of objectivity,
the absolute multiplicity of atomistic matter,
finds that all its thoughts are absolutely of no avail;
the omnipresence of the simple in the manifold externality
is for reflection an absolute contradiction
and also, since it cannot at the same time avoid
witnessing this omnipresence in the perception of life
and must therefore grant the actuality of this idea,
an incomprehensible mystery
for reflection does not grasp the concept,
nor does it grasp it as the substance of life.
But this simple life is not only omnipresent;
it is the one and only subsistence
and immanent substance of its objectivity;
but as subjective substance it is impulse,
more precisely the specific impulse of particular difference,
and no less essentially the one and universal impulse
of the specific that leads its particularization
back to unity and holds it there.
Only as this negative unity of its
objectivity and particularization is life self-referring,
life that exists for itself, a soul.
As such, it is essentially a singular that refers to
objectivity as to an other, an inanimate nature.
The originative judgment of life consists therefore in this,
that it separates itself off as individual subject from the objective
and, since it constitutes itself as the negative unity of the concept,
makes the presupposition of an immediate objectivity.

First, life is therefore to be considered as a living individual
that is for itself the subjective totality
and is presupposed as indifferent to an objectivity
that stands indifferent over against it.

Second, it is the life-process of sublating its presupposition,
of positing as negative the objectivity indifferent to it,
and of actualizing itself as the power
and negative unity of this objectivity.
By so doing, it makes itself into the universal
which is the unity of itself and its other.

Third, consequently life is the genus-process,
the process of sublating its singularization
and relating itself to its objective existence
as to itself.
Accordingly, this process is
on the one hand the turning back to its concept
and the repetition of the first forcible separation,
the coming to be of a new individuality
and the death of the immediate first;
but, on the other hand, the withdrawing into itself
of the concept of life is the becoming of
the concept that relates itself to itself,
of the concept that exists for itself,
universal and free, the transition into cognition.
