
SECTION I

Subjectivity

The concept is, to start with, formal,
the concept in its beginning
or as the immediate concept.
In this immediate unity,
its difference or its positedness
is, first, itself initially simple
and only a reflective shine,
so that the moments of the difference
are immediately the totality of the concept
and only the concept as such.

But, second, because it is absolute negativity,
the concept divides and posits itself
as the negative or the other of itself;
yet, because it is still immediate concept,
this positing or this differentiation is
characterized by the reciprocal
indifference of its moments,
each of which comes to be on its own;
in this division the unity of the concept is
still only an external connection.
Thus, as the connection of its moments
posited as self-subsisting and indifferent,
the concept is judgment.

Third, although the judgment contains
the unity of the concept that has been lost
in its self-subsisting moments,
this unity is not posited.
It will become posited by virtue of
the dialectical movement of the judgment
which, through this movement,
becomes syllogistic inference,
and this is the fully posited concept,
for in the inference the moments of
the concept as self-subsisting extremes
and their mediating unity are both equally posited.

But since this unity itself, as unifying middle,
and the moments, as self-subsisting extremes,
stand at first immediately opposite one another,
this contradictory relation that occurs
in the formal inference sublates itself,
and the completeness of the concept passes over
into the unity of totality;
the subjectivity of the concept
into its objectivity.

CHAPTER 1

The concept

The faculty of concepts is normally
associated with the understanding,
and the latter is accordingly distinguished
from the faculty of judgment
and from the faculty of syllogistic inferences
which is formal reason.
But it is particularly with reason
that the understanding is contrasted,
and it signifies then, not the faculty of concepts in general,
but the faculty of determinate concepts,
as if, as the prevailing opinion has it,
the concept were only a determinate.
When distinguished in this meaning
from the formal faculty of judgment and from formal reason,
the understanding is accordingly to be taken
as the faculty of the single determinate concept.
For the judgment and the syllogism or reason, as formal,
are themselves only a thing of the understanding,
since they are subsumed under the form
of the abstract determinateness of the concept.
Here, however, we are definitely not taking
the concept as just abstractly determined;
the understanding is therefore
to be distinguished from reason only
in that it is the faculty of the concept as such.

This universal concept that we now have to consider
contains the three moments of
universality, particularity, and singularity.
The difference and the determinations which the concept
gives itself in its process of distinguishing constitute
the sides formerly called positedness.
Since this positedness is in the concept
identical with being-in-and-for-itself,
each of the moments is just as much
the whole concept as it is determinate concept
and a determination of the concept.

It is at first pure concept,
or the determination of universality.
But the pure or universal concept is also
only a determinate or particular concept
that takes its place alongside the other concepts.
Because the concept is a totality,
and therefore in its universality
or pure identical self-reference
is essentially a determining and a distinguishing,
it possesses in itself the norm
by which this form of its self-identity,
in pervading all the moments
and comprehending them within,
equally determines itself immediately
as being only the universal
as against the distinctness of the moments.

Second, the concept is thereby posited
as this particular or determinate concept,
distinct from others.

Third, singularity is the concept reflecting itself
out of difference into absolute negativity.

This is at the same time the moment at which
it has stepped out of its identity
into its otherness and becomes judgment.

CHAPTER 2

Judgment

Judgment is the determinateness of the concept
posited in the concept itself.
The determinations of the concept,
or, what amounts to the same thing as shown,
the determinate concepts,
have already been considered on their own;
but this consideration was rather
a subjective reflection
or a subjective abstraction.
But the concept is itself this act of abstracting;
the positioning of its determinations over
against each other is its own determining.
Judgment is this positing of the determinate concepts
through the concept itself.

Judging is therefore another function than conceiving;
or rather, it is the other function of the concept,
for it is the determining of the concept through itself.
The further progress of judgment
into a diversity of judgments is
this progressive determination of the concept.
What kind of determinate concepts there are,
and how they prove to be necessary determinations of it,
this has to be exhibited in judgment.

Judgment can therefore be called
the first realization of the concept,
for reality denotes in general
the entry into existence as determinate being.
More precisely, the nature of this realization
has presented itself in such a way
that the moments of the concept are totalities
which, on the one hand, subsist on their own
through the concept's immanent reflection
or through its singularity;
on the other hand, however, the unity of
the concept is their connection.
The immanently reflected determinations are
determinate totalities that exist just as
essentially disconnected, indifferent to each other,
as mediated through each other.
The determining itself is a totality only as
containing these totalities and their connections.
This totality is the judgment.
The latter contains, therefore, the two self-subsistents
which go under the name of subject and predicate.
What each is cannot yet be said;
they are still indeterminate, for they are
to be determined only through the judgment.
Inasmuch as judgment is the concept as determinate,
the only determination at hand is the difference
that it contains between determinate
and still indeterminate concept.
As contrasted to the predicate,
the subject can at first be taken, therefore,
as the singular over against the universal,
or also as the particular over against the universal,
or the singular over against the particular;
so far, they stand to each other only as the more determinate
and the more universal in general.

It is therefore fitting and unavoidable to have these names,
“subject” and “predicate,” for the determinations of the judgment;
as names, they are something indeterminate, still in need of determination,
and therefore nothing but names.
It is partly for this reason that the determinations themselves
of the concept could not be used for the two sides of judgment;
but a still stronger reason is because of the nature of a concept determination
which is nothing abstract, nothing fixed,
but contains its opposite in it,
explicitly posited there;
since the sides of the judgment are themselves concepts
and therefore the totality of the determinations of the concept,
each side must run through all these determinations,
exhibiting them within whether in abstract or concrete form.
But now, if in this altering of determination
we want to fix the two sides in some general way,
names will be the most useful means,
for they can be kept the same throughout the process.
But a name remains distinct from the fact or the concept,
and this is a distinction that transpires within the judgment as such;
since the subject is in general the determinate term and more,
therefore, of an immediate existent,
whereas the predicate expresses the universal,
the essence or the concept, the subject as such is
at first only a kind of name;
what it is, is first enunciated only by the predicate
which contains being in the sense of the concept.
When we ask, “What is this?,” or “What kind of plant is this?,”
the being we are enquiring about is often just a name,
and once we learn this name, we are satisfied
that we now know what the fact is.
This is being in the sense of the subject.
The concept, however, or at least the essence and
the universal in general, is only given by the predicate,
and when we ask for it, we do it in the sense of the judgment.
God, therefore, or spirit, nature, or what have you, is
as the subject of a judgment only a name at first;
what any such subject is in accordance with the concept,
is first found only in the predicate.
When we ask for the predicate that belongs to such subjects,
the required judgment must be based on
a concept that is presupposed;
yet it is the predicate that first gives this concept.
It is, therefore, the mere
representation that in fact makes up the presupposed meaning,
and this yields only a nominal definition whereby it is a mere accident,
a historical fact, what is understood by a name.
So many disputes about whether a
predicate does or does not belong to a subject are, therefore, nothing more
than verbal disputes,
for they proceed from this form;
what lies at the base (subjectum) is
still nothing more than a name.

Secondly, we now have to examine more closely
how the connection of subject and predicate in judgment is determined,
and how the two are themselves thereby determined.
Judgment has in general totalities for its sides,
totalities that are at first essentially self-subsistent.
The unity of the concept is at first, therefore,
only a connection of self-subsistent terms;
it is not yet the concrete,
the fulfilled unity that has returned into itself
from this reality
but is a unity rather outside which the two terms persist as extremes
yet unsublated in it.
Now any consideration of the judgment can start
either from the originative unity of the concept
or from the self-subsistence of the extremes.
Judgment is the self-diremption of the concept;
therefore, it is by starting from the unity
of the concept as ground that the judgment is
considered in accordance with its true objectivity.
In this respect, judgment is the originative division
(or Teilung, in German) of an originative unity;
the German word for judgment, Urteil (or “primordial division”),
thus refers to what judgment is in and for itself.
But the concept is present in the judgment as appearance,
since its moments have attained self-subsistence there,
and it is to this side of externality
that ordinary representation is more likely to fasten.

From this subjective standpoint,
the subject and the predicate are
therefore treated as ready-made,
each for itself outside the other
the subject as a subject matter
that would exist even if it did not have that predicate,
and the predicate as a universal determination
that would exist even without accruing to this subject.
The act of judgment accordingly brings with it
the further reflection whether this or that predicate
which is in someone's head can
and should be attached to the subject matter
that exists outside it on its own;
the judgment itself is simply the act
that combines the predicate with the subject,
so that, if this combination did not occur,
the subject and predicate would still each remain what it is,
the one concretely existing as thing in itself,
the other as a representation in someone's head.
But the predicate which is combined with the subject
should also pertain to it,
which is to say, should be in and for itself identical with it.
The significance of their being combined is
that the subjective sense of judgment,
and the indifferent external persistence of the subject and predicate,
are again sublated.
Thus in “this action is good,” the copula indicates
that the predicate belongs to the being of the subject
and is not merely externally combined with it.
Of course, grammatically speaking this kind of subjective relation
that proceeds from the indifferent externality of subject and predicate is
perfectly valid, for it is words that are here externally combined.
It can also be mentioned in this context that
a proposition can indeed have a subject and predicate
in a grammatical sense without however being a judgment for that.
The latter requires that the predicate behave
with respect to the subject in a relation of conceptual determination,
hence as a universal with respect to a particular or singular.
And if what is said of a singular subject is
itself only something singular, as for instance,
“Aristotle died at the age of 73
in the fourth year of the 115th Olympiad,”
then this is a mere proposition, not a judgment.
There would be in it an element of judgment
only if one of the circumstances, say,
the date of death or the age of the philosopher,
came into doubt even though the stated figures
were asserted on the strength of some ground or other.
In that case, the figures would be taken as something universal,
as a time that, even without the determinate content of Aristotle's death,
would still stand on its own filled with some other content or simply empty.
Likewise would the news that my friend N. has died be a proposition,
and a judgment only if there were a question as to whether
he is actually dead and not just apparently dead.

In the usual definition of judgment,
that it is the combination of two concepts,
we may indeed accept the vague expression
of “combination” for the external copula,
and also accept that the terms combined are
at least meant to be concepts.
But the definition is otherwise a highly superficial one.
It is not just that in the disjunctive judgment, for instance,
there are more than two so-called concepts that are combined;
more to the point is rather that the definition is
much better than the matter defined,
for it is not determinations of concepts,
but determinations of representation that are in fact meant;
it was remarked in connection with the concept in general,
and with the concept as determinate,
that what usually goes under this name of concept
does not deserve the name at all;
where should concepts then come from in the case of judgment?
Above all this definition of judgment
ignores what is essential to it,
namely the difference of its determinations;
still less does it take into account
its relation to the concept.

As regards the further determination of the subject and predicate,
we have remarked above that it is in judgment
that they must first receive their determination.
But since judgment is the posited determinateness of the concept,
this determinateness possesses the given differences
immediately and abstractly as singularity and universality.
But inasmuch as judgment is in general the immediate existence
or the otherness of the concept that has not yet
restored itself to the unity through which it exists as concept,
there also emerges the determinateness that is void of concept,
the opposition of being and reflection or the in-itself.
But since the concept constitutes the essential ground of judgment,
these determinacies are at least indifferent in the sense that,
when one accrues to the subject and the other to the predicate,
the converse relation equally holds.
The subject, being the singular, appears at first as the existent
or as the one that exists for itself with
the determinate determinateness of a singular
on which judgment is passed,
as an actual object even when it is such in representation only
as for instance in the case of bravery, right, agreement, etc.
The predicate, which is the universal,
appears on the contrary as the reflection
of this judgment on that object,
or rather as the object's immanent reflection
that transcends the immediacy of the judgment
and sublates its determinacies as mere existents,
appears, that is, as the object's in-itselfness.
In this way, the start is made
from the singular as the first, the immediate,
and through the judgment
this singular is raised to universality,
just as, conversely,
the universal that exists only in itself
descends in the singular into existence
or becomes a being that exists for itself.

This significance of the judgment is
to be taken as its objective meaning
and at the same time as the true significance
of the previous forms of transition.
The existent comes to be and becomes another,
the finite passes over into the infinite
and in it passes away;
the existent comes forth into appearance
out of its ground and to this ground it founders;
the accidents manifest the wealth of substance
as well as its might;
in being, there is transition into an other;
in essence, there is the reflective shining
in an other that manifests the necessity of a connection.
This transition and this reflective shining have now
passed over into the originative division
of the concept in judgment,
and this division,
in bringing the singular back to
the in-itselfness of its universality,
equally determines the universal as something actual.
These two are one and the same,
the positing of singularity in its immanent reflection
and of the universal as determinate.

But equally pertaining to this objective meaning is
that the said differences,
as they re-occur in the determinateness of the concept,
are at the same time posited as only appearing,
that is to say, that they are nothing fixed
but accrue rather just as much to one determination
of the concept as to the other.
The subject is therefore equally to be taken as the in-itself,
and the predicate as determinate existence in contrast to it.
The subject without the predicate is what the thing without properties,
the thing-in-itself, is in the sphere of appearance,
an empty indeterminate ground;
it is then the implicit concept that receives
a difference and a determinateness only in the predicate;
the predicate thus constitutes the side of
the determinate existence of the subject.
Through this determinate universality
the subject refers to the outside,
is open to the influence of other things
and thereby confronts them actively.
What is there comes forth from its in-itselfness
into the universal element of combination and relations,
into negative references
and into the interplay of actuality
which is a continuation of the singular
into other singulars
and is, therefore, universality.

Yet the identity just indicated, the fact that
the determination of the subject accrues equally
to the predicate and vice versa,
is not just a matter for our consideration;
it is not only in itself but is also posited in the judgment;
for the judgment is the reference connecting the two;
the copula expresses that the subject is the predicate.
The subject is the determinate determinateness,
and the predicate is this determinateness
of the subject as posited;
the subject is determined only in its predicate,
or is subject only in it;
in the predicate, it is turned back into itself
and is therein the universal.
Now in so far as the subject is the self-subsistent term,
this identity has the relation that the predicate
does not possess a self-subsistence of its own
but has its subsistence only in the subject;
it inheres in the subject.
Accordingly, since the predicate is distinguished from the subject,
it is only a singularized determinateness of the subject,
only one of its properties;
the subject itself is however the concrete,
the totality of manifold determinacies,
just as the predicate contains one of them;
the subject is the universal.
But, on the other hand, the predicate also is self-subsistent universality,
and the subject conversely only one determination of it.
The predicate thus subsumes the subject;
the singularity and the particularity are not for themselves
but have their essence and their substance in the universal.
The predicate expresses the subject in its concept;
the singular and the particular are to the
subject accidental determinations;
the subject is their absolute possibility.
When by “subsumption” an external connection
of subject and predicate is thought,
and the subject is represented as something self-subsistent,
then subsumption refers to the subjective
act of judging mentioned above,
namely the judging that starts off
from the self-subsistence of both subject and predicate.
Subsumption is then only the application of
the universal to a particular or singular
posited under it in accordance
with an indeterminate representation,
one of lesser quantity.

When we treat the identity of subject and predicate
as meaning that at one time one determination of the concept
belongs to the subject and the other to the predicate,
and at another time the converse equally applies,
then the identity is as yet still implicit;
on account of the self-subsistent
diversity of the two sides of judgment,
their posited connection also has
the two at first as diverse.
But it is the identity void of difference
that in fact constitutes the true connection
of the subject and predicate.
The determination of the concept is itself
essentially a connection, for it is a universal;
the same determinations, therefore,
which the subject and the predicate each have,
are also had by their connection.
The connection is universal,
for it is the positive identity of both,
of the subject and predicate;
but it is also determinate,
for the determinateness of the predicate is
the determinateness of the subject;
it is singular as well, for in it the self-subsisting extremes are
sublated as in their negative unity.
In judgment, however, this identity is not posited yet;
the copula is as the still indeterminate connection of being in general,
“A is B,” for the self-subsistence of the concept's determinacies,
or the extremes, is in judgment the reality
that the concept has within.
If the “is” of the copula were already posited as the determinate
and fulfilled unity of subject and predicate earlier mentioned,
were posited as their concept,
it would then already be the conclusion of syllogistic inference.

To restore again this identity of the concept,
or rather to posit it,
this is the goal of the movement of the judgment.
What is already present in the judgment is,
on the one hand, the self-subsistence
but also reciprocal determinateness of
the subject and predicate,
and, on the other hand,
their still abstract connection.
“The subject is the predicate”;
this is what the judgment says at first.
But since the predicate is not
supposed to be what the subject is,
a contradiction is at hand that must resolve itself,
must pass over into a result.
Or rather, since the subject and predicate are
in and for themselves the totality of the concept,
and judgment is the reality of the concept,
the judgment's forward movement is only development;
what comes forth from it is already present in it,
and to this extent the demonstration is a display,
a reflection as the positing of that which is already
at hand in the extreme terms of the judgment;
but even this positing is already present;
it is the connection of the extremes.

First, as immediate, judgment is the judgment of existence;
its subject is immediately an abstract, existent singular,
and the predicate is an immediate determinateness or property of it,
an abstract universal.

Second, as this qualitative character of
the subject and predicate is sublated,
the determination of the one begins
to shine reflectively in the other;
the judgment is now the judgement of reflection.

But this external combination passes over
into the essential identity of a substantial, necessary combination;
and so we have, third, the judgment of necessity.

Fourth, since in this essential identity
the difference of subject and predicate has become a form,
the judgment becomes subjective;
it entails the opposition of the concept and its reality
and the comparison of the two;
it is the judgment of the concept.

This emergence of the concept grounds
the transition of judgment into syllogistic inference.

CHAPTER 3

The syllogism

The syllogism is the result of
the restoration of the concept in the judgment,
and consequently the unity and the truth of the two.
The concept as such holds its moments
sublated in this unity;
in judgment, the unity is an internal
or, what amounts to the same, an external one,
and although the moments are connected,
they are posited as self-subsisting extremes.
In the syllogism, the determinations of the concept
are like the extremes of the judgment,
and at the same time their determinate unity is posited.

Thus the syllogism is the completely posited concept;
it is, therefore, the rational.
The understanding is taken to be
the faculty of the determinate concept
which is held fixed for itself by virtue of
abstraction and the form of universality.
But in reason the determinate concepts are
posited in their totality and unity.
Therefore, it is not just that the syllogism is rational
but that everything rational is a syllogism.
Syllogistic inference has long since been ascribed to reason;
but, on the other hand, reason in and for itself,
and rational principles and laws,
are so spoken of that no light is thrown
on why the one reason that syllogizes,
and the other which is the source
of laws and otherwise eternal truths
and absolute thoughts, hang together.
If the former is supposed to be
only a formal reason
while the latter is supposed to be
the one that generates content,
then one would expect on this distinction
that precisely the form of reason,
the inference, would not be missing in the latter.
And yet, the two are commonly held so far apart,
the one without mention of the other,
that it seems as though the reason
of absolute thoughts were ashamed,
so to speak, of inferential reason,
and the syllogism were listed as also
an activity of reason merely as matter of tradition.
But surely, as we have just remarked,
logical reason must be essentially recognizable,
when regarded as formal, also in the reason
that is concerned with a content;
indeed, no content can be rational
except by virtue of the rational form.
In this matter we cannot rely on
what is commonly said about reason,
for common views fail to tell us
what we are to understand by reason;
this would-be rational wisdom is so busy with its objects
that it forgets to pay attention to reason itself
but only identifies it by characterizing it
through the objects that it is said to have.
If reason is supposed to be a cognition
that would know about God, freedom, right and duty,
the infinite, the unconditional, the suprasensible,
or even gives only representations and feelings of such objects,
then for one thing these objects are only negative,
and for another the original question still stands,
what is there in all these objects that makes them rational?
The answer is that the infinitude in them
is not the empty abstraction from the finite,
is not a universality which is void of content and determination,
but is the fulfilled universality, the concept which is determined
and is truly in possession of its determinateness,
namely, in that it differentiates itself internally
and is the unity of its thus intelligible and determined differences.
Only in this way does reason rise above
the finite, the conditioned, the sensuous,
or however one might define it,
and is in this negativity essentially replete with content,
for as unity it is the unity of determinate extremes.
And so the rational is nothing but the syllogism.

Now the syllogism, like judgment, is at first immediate;
as such, its determinations (termini) are
simple, abstract determinacies;
it is then the syllogism of the understanding.
If one stays at this configuration of the syllogism,
then its rationality, though present there and posited,
is not apparent.
The essential element of the syllogism is
the unity of the extremes,
the middle term that unites them
and the ground that supports them.
Abstraction, by holding fast to
the self-subsistence of the extremes,
posits this unity opposite them,
as a determinateness with just as fixed
an existence of its own,
thus grasping it more as a non-unity than as a unity.
The expression, “middle term” (medius terminus),
is derived from spatial representation,
and has its share of responsibility for
why we stop short at the externality of the terms.
Now if the syllogism consists in
the positing in it of the unity of the extremes,
but if this unity is simply taken
on the one hand as a particular by itself,
and on the other hand as only an external connection,
and non-unity is made the essential relation of syllogism,
then the reason of the syllogism is of no help to rationality.

First, the syllogism of existence,
in which the terms are thus
immediately and abstractly determined,
demonstrates internally that,
since like judgment it is
the connection of those terms,
these are not in fact abstract
but each contains in it the reference
connecting it to the others,
and the determination of the middle term is
not just a determinateness opposed to the
determinations of the extremes
but contains these extremes posited in it.

Through this dialectic,
the syllogism of existence becomes
the syllogism of reflection, the second syllogism.
Its terms are such that in each the other
shines essentially reflected in it,
or are posited as mediated,
as they are indeed supposed to be
in accordance with the nature of
syllogistic inference in general.

Third, inasmuch as this reflective shining
or this mediatedness is reflected into itself,
syllogism is determined as the syllogism of necessity,
one in which the mediating factor is
the objective nature of the fact.
As this syllogism determines the extremes
of the concept also as totalities,
it has attained the correspondence
of its concept (or the middle term)
and its existence (or the difference of the extremes).
It has attained its truth;
and with that it has stepped forth
out of subjectivity into objectivity.
