
C. ABSOLUTE MECHANISM

a. The center

The empty manifoldness of the object is
now gathered first into objective singularity,
into the simple self-determining middle point.
Secondly, in so far as the object retains as
an immediate totality its indifference to determinateness,
the latter too is present in it as unessential
or as an outside-one-another of many objects.
As against this immediate totality,
the prior or the essential determinateness constitutes
the real middle term between the many interacting objects;
it unites them in and for themselves
and is their objective universality.
Universality exhibited itself first in
the relation of communication,
as present only through positing;
as objective universality, however,
it is the pervading immanent
essence of the objects.

In the material world it is the central body
which is the genus or rather the individualized universality
of the single objects and their mechanical process.
The unessential single bodies relate
to one another by impact and pressure;
this kind of relation does not hold between the central body
and the objects of which it is the essence;
for their externality no longer constitutes
their fundamental determination.
Hence their identity with the central body is rather rest,
namely the being at their center;
this unity is their concept existing in and for itself.
It nevertheless remains only an ought,
since the objects' externality, still posited at the same time,
does not conform to that unity.
The striving which the objects consequently have towards
the center is their absolute universality,
one which is not posited through communication;
it constitutes the true rest,
itself concrete and not posited from the outside,
into which the process of instability must find its way back.
It is for this reason an empty abstraction
to assume in mechanics that a body
set in motion would go on moving
in a straight line to infinity
if it did not lose movement
because of external resistance.
Friction, or whatever other form resistance takes,
is only a phenomenon of centrality;
it is the latter that in principle
brings the body back to itself,
since that against which the body rubs
and incurs friction has its power of resistance
only because it is united with the center.
In things spiritual the center,
and the union with it, assume higher forms;
but the unity of the concept
and the reality of that unity,
which is here in a first instance mechanical centrality,
must there too constitute the fundamental determination.

The central body has therefore ceased to be a mere object,
for in the latter the determinateness is something unessential,
whereas now the central body no longer
has only being-in-itself, in-itselfness,
but also has the being-for-itself
of the objective totality.
For this reason it can be regarded as an individual.
Its determinateness is essentially different
from a mere order or arrangement
and external combination of diverse parts;
as a determinateness that exists
in and for itself it is an immanent form,
a self-determining principle to which the objects inhere
and in virtue of which they are bound together in a true One.

But this central individual is at first only
a middle term that as yet has no true extremes;
as the negative unity of the total concept
it dirempts itself rather into such extremes.
Or again: the previously non-self-subsistent,
self-external objects become likewise determined as
individuals by the retreat of the concept;
the self-identity of the central body, still a striving,
is burdened by an externality
to which, in being taken up into
the body's objective singularity,
the latter is communicated.
The objects, through this centrality of their own,
are positioned outside the original center
and are themselves centers for the non-self-subsistent objects.
These second centers and the non-self-subsistent objects are
brought into unity by the absolute middle term.

But the relative individual centers themselves
also constitute the middle term of a second syllogism.
This middle term is on the one hand subsumed
under a higher extreme,
the objective universality and power of the absolute center;
on the other hand, it subsumes under it
the non-self-subsistent objects whose
superficiality and formal singularization it supports.
These non-self-subsistent objects are in turn
the middle term of a third syllogism,
the formal syllogism,
for since the central individuality obtains through
them the externality by virtue of which,
in referring to itself, is also strives
towards an absolute middle point,
those non-self-subsistent objects are
the link between absolute and relative central individuality.
The formal objects have for their essence
the identical gravity of their immediate central body
in which they inhere as in their subject
and the extreme of singularity;
through the externality which they constitute,
this immediate central body is subsumed under
the absolute central body;
they therefore are the formal middle term of particularity.
But the absolute individual is the objectively
universal middle term that brings into unity
and holds firm the inwardness of
the relative individual and its externality.
Similarly, the government, the individual citizens,
and the needs or the external life of these,
are also three terms,
of which each is the middle term of the other two.
The government is the absolute center
in which the extreme of the singulars is
united with their external existence;
the singulars are likewise the middle term that incites
that universal individual into external concrete existence
and transposes their ethical essence into the extreme of actuality.
The third syllogism is the formal syllogism,
the syllogism of reflective shine in which
the singular citizens are tied by their needs
and external existence to this universal
absolute individuality;
this is a syllogism that, as merely subjective,
passes over into the others and has its truth in them.

This totality, whose moments are themselves
the completed relations of the concept,
the syllogisms in which each of
the three different objects
runs through the determination of
the middle term and the extreme,
constitutes free mechanism.
In it the different objects have objective universality
for their fundamental determination,
the pervasive gravity that persists
self-identical in the particularization.
The connections of pressure, impact, attraction,
and the like, as also of aggregations or mixtures,
belong to the relation of externality
which is at the basis of the third of the three syllogisms.
Order, which is the merely external
determinateness of the objects,
has passed over into immanent
and objective determination.
This is the law.

b. The law

In law, the more specific difference of
the idealized reality of objectivity
versus the external reality comes into view.
The object, as the immediate totality of the concept,
does not yet possess an externality
differentiated from the concept,
and the latter is not posited for itself.
Now that through the mediation of the process
the object has withdrawn into itself,
there has arisen the opposition of
simple centrality as against an externality
now determined as externality,
that is, one posited as not existing in and for itself.
That moment of identity or idealization of individuality is,
on account of the reference to externality, an ought;
it is the unity of the concept,
determined in-and-for-itself and self-determining,
to which that external reality does not correspond,
and therefore does not go past the mere striving towards it.
But individuality is, in and for itself,
the concrete principle of negative unity,
and as such is itself totality;
it is a unity that dirempts itself
into the specific differences of the concept
while abiding within its self-equal universality;
it is thus the central point expanded
inside its pure ideality by difference.
This reality that corresponds to the concept is
the idealized reality,
distinct from the reality that is only a striving;
it is difference, earlier a plurality of objects
but now in its essential nature,
and taken up into pure universality.
This real ideality is the soul of
the hitherto developed objective totality,
the identity of the system
which is now determined in and for itself.

The objective being-in-and-for-itself
thus manifests itself more precisely
in its totality as the negative unity of the center,
a unity that divides into
subjective individuality and external objectivity,
maintains the former in the latter
and determines it in an idealized difference.
This self-determining unity that absolutely
reduces external objectivity to ideality
is a principle of self-movement;
the determinateness of this animating principle,
which is the difference of the concept itself, is the law.
Dead mechanism was the mechanical process of objects
above considered that immediately appeared as self-subsisting,
but precisely for that reason are in truth non-self-subsistent
and have their center outside them;
this process that passes over into rest
exhibits either contingency and indeterminate difference
or formal uniformity.
This uniformity is indeed a rule, but not law.
Only free mechanism has a law,
the determination proper to pure individuality
or to the concept existing for itself.
As difference, the law is in itself
the inexhaustible source of a self-igniting fire
and, since in the ideality of its difference
it refers only to itself,
it is free necessity.

c. Transition of mechanism

This soul is however still immersed in its body.
The now determined but inner concept of objective totality is
free necessity in the sense that the law
has not yet stepped in opposite its object;
it is concrete centrality as a universality
immediately diffused in its objectivity.
Such an ideality does not have, therefore,
the objects themselves for its determinate difference;
these are self-subsistent individuals of the totality,
or also, if we look back at the formal stage,
non-individual, external objects.
The law is indeed immanent in them
and it does constitute their nature and power;
but its difference is shut up in its ideality
and the objects are not themselves differentiated
in the idealized non-indifference of the law.
But the object possesses its essential self-subsistence
solely in the idealized centrality and its laws;
it has no power, therefore, to put up resistance
to the judgment of the concept
and to maintain itself in abstract, indeterminate
self-subsistence and remoteness.
Because of the idealized difference
which is immanent in it,
its existence is a determinateness posited by the concept.
Its lack of self-subsistence is thus no longer
just a striving towards a middle point,
with respect to which, precisely because
its connection with it is only that of a striving,
it still has the appearance of
a self-subsistent external object;
it is rather a striving towards the object
determinedly opposed to it;
and likewise the center has itself
for that reason fallen apart
and its negativity has passed over
into objectified opposition.
Centrality, therefore, is
now the reciprocally negative
and tense connection of these objectivities.
Thus free mechanism determines itself to chemism.
