
CHAPTER 2

Real measure

Measure is now determined as a connection of measures
that make up the quality of distinct self-subsisting somethings,
or, in more common language, things.
The relations of measures just considered belong
to abstract qualities like space and time;
further examples of these now to be considered
are specific gravity and then chemical properties,
that is, determinations of concrete material existence.
Space and time are also moments of these measures,
but are now subordinated to other determinations
and no longer behave relative to one another
only according to their own conceptual determination.
In the case of sound, for instance,
the time within which a certain number of vibrations occur,
the spatial width and thickness of the sounding body,
are moments of its determination.
But the magnitudes of such idealized moments are externally determined;
they no longer assume the form of a ratio of powers
but relate in the usual direct way,
and harmony is reduced to the strictly
external simplicity of numbers in relations
which are most easy to grasp;
they therefore afford a satisfaction
which is the exclusive reserve of the senses,
for there is nothing there of representation,
imagery, thought, or the like,
that would satisfy spirit.
Since the sides which now constitute
the relation of measure are themselves measures,
but at the same time real somethings, their measures are,
in the first instance, immediate measures,
and the relations in them direct relations.
We now have to examine the further determination of
the relation of such relations.
Measure, now real measure, is as follows.

First, it is the independent measure of a type of body,
a measure which relates to other measures
and, in thus relating to them, specifies them as
well as their self-subsistent materiality.
This specification, as an external
connecting reference to many others in general,
produces other relations, and consequently other measures;
the specific self-subsistence, for its part,
does not remain fixed in one direct relation
but passes over into specific determinacies,
and this is a series of measures.

Second, the direct relations that thus result are in themselves
determinate and exclusive measures (elective affinities).
But because they are at the same time only
quantitatively different from one another,
what we have  is a progression of relations
which is in part merely external,
but is also interrupted by qualitative relations,
forming a nodal line of specifically self-subsisting things.

Third, what emerges in this progression for measure, however,
is the measureless:
the measureless in general and more specifically
the infinitude of measure in which the mutually exclusive
forms of self-subsistence are one with each other,
and anything self-subsistent comes to stand
in negative reference to itself.
