
C. INFINITY

The infinite in its simple concept
can be regarded, first of all,
as a fresh definition of the absolute;
as self-reference devoid of determination,
it is posited as being and becoming.
The forms of existence have no place in
the series of determinations that can be
regarded as definitions of the absolute,
since the forms of that sphere are
immediately posited for themselves
only as determinacies, as finite in general.
But the infinite is accepted
unqualifiedly as absolute,
since it is explicitly determined
as the negation of the finite;
the restrictedness
(to which being and becoming would somehow be susceptible
even if they do not have it or exhibit it)
is thereby both explicitly referred to and denied in it.
But, in fact, by just this negation the infinite is
not already free from restrictedness and finitude.
It is essential to distinguish
the true concept of infinity
from bad infinity,
the infinite of reason from
the infinite of the understanding.
The latter is in fact a finitized infinite,
and, as we shall now discover,
in wanting to maintain the infinite
pure and distant from the finite,
the infinite is by that very fact
only made finite.
The infinite
(a) in simple determination,
is the affirmative as negation of the finite;
(b) but is thereby in alternating
determination with the infinite,
and is abstract, one-sided infinite;
(c) is the self-sublation of this infinite
and of the finite in one process.
This is the true infinite.

a. The infinite in general

The infinite is the negation of negation, the affirmative,
being that has reinstated itself out of restrictedness.
The infinite is, in a more intense sense
than the first immediate being;
it is the true being;
the elevation above restriction.
At the mention of the infinite, soul and spirit light up,
for in the infinite the spirit is at home,
and not only abstractly;
rather, it rises to itself, to the light of its thinking,
its universality, its freedom.
What is first given with the concept of the infinite is this,
that in its being-in-itself existence is determined
as finite and transcends restriction.
It is the very nature of the finite
that it transcend itself,
that it negate its negation
and become infinite.
Consequently, the infinite does not stand
above the finite as something ready-made by itself,
as if the finite stood fixed outside or below it.
Nor is it we only, as a subjective reason,
who transcend the finite into the infinite,
as if, in saying that the infinite is a concept of reason
and that through reason we elevate ourselves above things temporal,
we did this without prejudice to the finite,
without this elevation
(which remains external to the finite)
affecting it.
In so far as the finite itself is being elevated to infinity,
it is not at all an alien force that does this for it;
it is rather its nature to refer itself to itself as restriction
(both restriction as such and as ought)
and to transcend this restriction,
or rather, in this self-reference,
to have negated the restriction
and gone above and beyond it.
It is not in the sublation of the finite in general
that infinity in general comes to be,
but the finite is rather just this,
that through its nature it comes to be itself the infinite.
Infinity is its affirmative determination,
its vocation, what it truly is in itself.
The finite has thus vanished into the infinite
and what is, is only the infinite.
