A. THE JUDGMENT OF EXISTENCE

In the subjective judgment we expect to see
one and the same object double,
once in its singular actuality,
and again in its essential identity
or in its concept:
the singular raised into its universality
or, what is the same thing,
the universal made singular into its actuality.
The judgment is thus truth,
for it is the agreement of the concept and reality.
But it is not at first constituted in this way,
for at first the judgment is immediate,
since as yet no reflection and no movement
of the determinations has been found in it.
This immediacy renders the first judgment
a judgment of immediate existence;
we can also call it a qualitative judgment,
but only in so far as quality does not apply
to the determinateness of being alone
but also extends to the universality
which, because of its simplicity,
likewise has the form of immediacy.

The judgment of existence is also
the judgment of inherence because,
though immediacy is its determination,
it is the subject that in the distinction
between subject and predicate is the immediate
and hence the first and the essential
term in the judgment,
and the predicate consequently takes on
the form of something that does not subsist on its own
but has its foundation in the subject.

a. The positive judgment

1. The subject and predicate, as we have just said,
are names at first that receive their actual determination
only as the judgment runs its course.
However, as sides of the judgment,
the judgment being the posited determinate concept,
they have the determination of moments of the concept,
but, on account of their immediacy,
this determination is as yet quite simple,
still not enriched by mediation
and also still caught up in
the abstract opposition of
abstract singularity
and abstract universality.
The predicate, to speak of it first,
is the abstract universal;
this abstract is conditioned by mediation,
by the sublation of singularity and particularity,
but so far such a mediation is here only a presupposition.
In the sphere of the concept
there can be no other immediacy
than the one that contains
mediation in and for itself
and has arisen only through its sublation;
this is the immediacy of the universal.
Thus qualitative being also is
in its concept a universal;
as being, however, the immediacy is
not yet posited as such;
it is only as universality
that immediacy is the concept determination
in which it is posited that
negativity essentially belongs to it.
This connection is given in the judgment
in which universality is the predicate of a subject.
Similarly the subject is an abstract singular,
or the immediate which is supposed to be such
and therefore the singular as a something in general.
The subject constitutes, therefore,
the abstract side of the judgment,
the side in it according to which
the concept has passed over into externality.
As these two concept determinations are determined,
so is also their connection,
the “is” or the copula;
it too can have no other meaning than
that of an immediate, abstract being.
It is because of this connection,
which still does not contain any mediation or negation,
that this judgment is called “positive.”

2. The first pure expression of
the positive judgment is, therefore,
the proposition: the singular is universal.
This expression must not be put
in the form of “A is B,”
for A and B are totally formless
and hence meaningless names,
whereas judgment in general,
and therefore already the judgment of existence,
has determinations of the concept for its extremes.
“A is B” can stand just as well
for any mere proposition as for a judgment.
But what is asserted in every judgment,
even one more richly determined in form,
is the proposition that has this determined content,
namely, “the singular is universal,”
for every judgment is in principle
also an abstract judgment.
(Regarding the negative judgment,
how far it likewise comes under this expression,
of this we shall speak presently.)
However, if no thought is given to
the fact that with every judgment,
the positive at least,
the assertion is made that the singular is universal,
this happens either because no attention is
given to the determinate form differentiating subject and object
(for it is taken for granted that the judgment is
nothing but the connecting of two concepts)
or also likely because the further content of the judgment,
“Gaius is learned,” or “the rose is red,”
comes drifting in before the mind,
and the latter, busy with the picture of Gaius etc.,
fails to reflect on the form;
even though, at least, such a content as “Gaius,”
which is the one that usually has to be dragged in as an example,
is much less interesting than the form,
and is indeed chosen because it is uninteresting,
not to divert attention from the form to itself.

The objective meaning of the proposition stating
that the singular is universal conveys,
as already incidentally noted,
both the perishableness of singular things
and their positive subsistence in the concept in general.
The concept itself is imperishable,
but that which emerges from it in its division
is subjected to alteration
and to falling back into its universal nature.
But the universal, conversely,
gives itself a determinate existence.
Just as essence goes out into
reflective shine in its determinations;
or ground into concrete existence in appearance;
and substance into manifestation in its accidents,
so does the universal resolve itself into the singular;
judgment is this resolution of the universal,
the development of the negativity
which, implicitly, it already is.
This last circumstance is expressed
by the converse proposition,
“the universal is singular,”
which is also equally spoken in the positive judgment.
The subject, the immediate singular at first,
is in the judgment itself referred to its other,
namely the universal;
it is thereby posited as the concrete
according to the category of being,
as a something of many qualities;
or as the concrete of reflection,
a thing of manifold properties,
an actual of manifold possibilities,
a substance of precisely such accidents.
Because these manifolds here belong
to the subject of the judgment, the something, the thing, etc.,
is in its qualities, properties, or accidents,
reflected into itself, or continues across them,
maintaining itself in them and them in itself.
Positedness or determinateness belongs to being
which is in and for itself.
The subject is therefore inherently the universal.
The predicate, on the contrary,
being this universality not as real or concrete,
but as abstract,
is in contrast to the subject the determinateness;
it contains only one moment of the subject's totality
to the exclusion of the others.
On account of this negativity,
which as an extreme of the judgment is at the
same time self-referring,
the predicate is an abstract singular.
For instance, in the proposition,
“the rose is fragrant,”
the predicate expresses only one of
the many properties of the rose;
it isolates it, whereas in the subject
the property is joined with the others;
likewise in the dissolution of the thing,
the manifold properties that inhere in it become
isolated in acquiring self-subsistence as materials.
From this side, then, the proposition of the judgment says:
the universal is singular.

By juxtaposing this reciprocal determination of
subject and predicate in the judgment,
we thus obtain this twofold result.
(1) Immediately, the subject is indeed
an existent or the singular,
while the predicate is the universal.
But because the judgment connects the two,
and the subject is determined as
universal by the predicate,
the subject is then the universal.
(2) The predicate is determined in the subject,
for it is not a determination in general
but the determination rather of the subject.
“The rose is fragrant.”
This fragrance is not some indeterminate fragrance or other,
but the fragrance of the rose.
The predicate is therefore a singular.
Now since the subject and predicate stand related in the judgment,
they should retain the opposition of concept determinations;
likewise, in the reciprocity of causality,
before the latter attains its truth,
the two sides are still
supposed to remain self-subsistent
and mutually opposed as against
the equality of their determination.
Therefore, when the subject is determined as universal,
the predicate should not also be taken
in its determination of universality,
for then we would have no judgment;
it must rather be taken only in its
determination of singularity.
And if the subject is determined as singular,
then the predicate is to be taken as universal.
If we reflect on the mere identity above,
then we have these two identical propositions,
“the singular is singular,”
“the universal is universal,”
in which the sides of the judgment
would have completely fallen apart;
only the self-reference of each is
expressed while the reference connecting
them to each other is dissolved;
and thus the judgment would be sublated.
Of the two propositions we drew,
the first, “the universal is singular,”
expresses the judgment according to its content,
as an isolated determination in the predicate
and as the totality of determinations in the subject.
The other, “the singular is universal,”
expresses it according to form as immediately given
through the judgment itself.
In the immediate positive judgment,
the extremes are still simple:
form and content are therefore still united.
Or, in other words, it does not
consist of two propositions;
the twofold connection that it yielded
immediately constitutes the one positive judgment.
For its extremes are
(a) the self-subsisting abstract determinations of judgment,
and (b) each side of the determination is determined
through the other by virtue of the copula connecting them.
Implicitly, however, the difference of form and content
is for this reason present in it, as we have seen;
and indeed, what the first proposition contains,
that the singular is universal, belongs to form,
for the proposition expresses the
immediate determinateness of the judgment.
The relation, on the contrary,
which the other proposition expresses,
that the universal is singular
or that the subject is determined as universal
whereas the predicate is determined as particular or singular,
concerns the content for its determinations are only
the result of an immanent reflection
by virtue of which the immediate determinacies of
the judgment are sublated
and the form is thereby converted into an identity
that has withdrawn into itself
and persists over against the distinction of form:
it converts itself into content.

3. If now the two propositions,
the one of form and the other of content,

(Subject) (Predicate)
The singular is universal
The universal is singular,

were to be united because
they are contained in the one positive judgment,
so that both, the subject as well as the predicate,
were determined as the unity of singularity and universality,
then both the subject and predicate would be the particular,
and this must be recognized as
implicitly their inner determination.
However, this combination would be arrived at only
through an external reflection;
moreover, the proposition that results from it,
“the particular is the particular,”
would no longer be a judgment
but an empty identical proposition
as were the two propositions already found
in the positive judgment,
“the singular is singular,”
and “the universal is universal.”
Singularity and universality cannot
yet be united into particularity,
because in the positive judgment
they are still posited as immediate.
Or again, the judgment must still be
distinguished according to its form and its content,
because the subject and predicate are themselves
still distinguished as immediacy and mediated,
or because the judgment, according to its connection,
is both the self-subsistence of the connected terms
and their reciprocal determination or mediation.

In first place, then, the meaning of the judgment
when considered according to its form is
that the singular is universal.
But in fact such an immediate singular is
definitely not universal;
its predicate is of wider extension,
does not correspond to it.
The subject is a being existing
immediately for itself,
and hence the opposite of that abstraction,
of that universality posited through mediation
that was supposed to be predicated of it.

In second place, if the judgment is
considered according to its content,
or as the proposition, “the universal is singular,”
then the subject is a universe of qualities,
an infinitely determined concrete universe,
and since its determinacies are as yet
qualitites, properties, or accidents,
its totality is the bad infinite plurality of them.
Such a subject, therefore, is not at all
the one single property that its predicate declares.
Consequently, both propositions must be united,
and the positive judgment must be posited as negative instead.

b. The negative judgment

1. We spoke earlier of the common notion
that whether the content of a judgment is true or false
depends solely on the content itself,
since logical truth concerns only the form
and its only requirement is that such
content shall not contradict itself.
Nothing else is reckoned as the form of judgment except
that the latter is a connection of two concepts.
But we have seen that these two concepts are not
just the relationless determination of a sum,
but that they relate to each other as singular and universal.
These are the determinations that
constitute the truly logical content
and also, abstracted in that way,
the content of the positive judgment;
whatever other content is in a judgment
(“the sun is round,” “Cicero was a greatRoman orator,”
 “it is daytime now,” etc.)
does not concern the judgment as such;
the judgment only says that the subject is predicate,
or, since these are only names,
that the singular is universal and vice versa.
It is because of this purely logical content
that the positive judgment is not true
but has its truth in the negative judgment.
In judgment, so it is required,
the content simply ought not to contradict itself;
but it does contradict itself in the positive judgment,
as we have just seen.
At any rate, it makes absolutely no difference
if that logical content is called form,
and by content is understood only the remaining empirical filling,
for even then the form would not contain a mere empty identity outside
which the content determination would then lie.
The positive judgment has in fact
no truth through its form as positive judgment;
whoever calls truth the correctness of an intuition or a perception,
the agreement of representation with the subject matter,
has for a minimum no expression left for that
which is the subject matter and the aim of philosophy.
We should at least say of these that they are the truth of reason,
and it will surely be granted that such judgments
as “Cicero was a great orator,”
that “it is daytime now,”
are definitely not truths of reason.
But they are not such truths,
not because they have an empirical content as it were contingently,
but because they are only positive judgments that can have,
and ought to have, no other content  than an immediate singular
and an abstract determinateness.

The positive judgment first attains its truth in the negative judgment:
the singular is not abstractly universal,
but rather, the predicate of the singular,
because it is such a predicate,
or because, if considered by itself
without reference to the subject,
it is an abstract universal,
is for that very reason itself something determinate;
from the start, therefore, the singular is a particular.
Furthermore, with respect to the other proposition
that the positive judgment contains,
the meaning of the negative judgment is
that the universal is not abstractly singular
but that this predicate, “singular,”
by the very fact that it is a predicate,
or because it refers to a universal subject,
is more than just mere singularity,
and the universal, accordingly,
is from the start equally a particular.
Since this universal, as subject,
is itself in the judgment determination of singularity,
the two propositions both reduce to one:
“the singular is a particular.”

We may remark that
(a) the particularity that here comes to the predicate has
already come up for consideration before;
here, however, it is not posited by external reflection
but has arisen rather as mediated by the negative connection
indicated in the judgment.
(b) This determination results here only for the predicate.
In the immediate judgment, the judgment of existence,
the subject is the underlying basis;
the determination seems at first, therefore, to occur in the predicate.
But in fact this first negation cannot as yet be a determination,
or cannot truly be the positing of the singular,
for such a positing is only a second moment,
the negative of the negative.

The singular is a particular:
this is the positive expression of the negative judgment.
This expression, therefore, is not the positive judgment itself,
for the latter, because of its immediacy,
has an abstraction for its extremes,
while the particular,
precisely through the positing of the judgment connection,
results as the first mediated determination.
But this determination is not to be taken
only as a moment of the extremes,
but also as the determination of the connection,
as it truly is from the start;
in other words, the judgment is also
to be considered as negative.

This transition is founded on
the relation of the extremes
and on their connection
in the judgment as such.

The positive judgment is the connection of
the singular and the universal
which are such immediately and each, therefore,
is not at the same time what the other is.
The connection is therefore just as
essentially separation, or negative;
for this reason the positive judgment was to be posited as negative.
There was no need, therefore,
for the logicians to make such a fuss about
the not of the negative judgment
being attached to the copula.
In the judgment, the determination of the extremes is
equally a determinate connection.
The judgment determination, or the extreme,
is not the purely qualitative one of immediate being that
only stands over against an other outside it.
Nor is it the determination of reflection,
which, in accordance with its general form,
behaves positively and negatively,
posited in either case as exclusive,
only implicitly identical with the other.
The judgment determination,
as the determination of the concept,
is a universal within, posited as extending continuously in its other.
Conversely, the judgment connection is
the same deterination as the
extremes have;
for it is precisely this universality and continuous extension
of each into the other;
in so far as these are distinguished,
the connection also has negativity in it.

The just stated transition from
the form of the connection
to the form of the determination
has the immediate consequence
that the not of the copula
must just as equally be attached to the predicate
and that the latter must be determined as the not-universal.
But, through a no less immediate consequence,
the not-universal is the particular.
If the focus is on the negative
according to the totally abstract
determination of immediate non-being,
then the predicate is the
totally indeterminate not-universal.
This is the determination which is normally treated in logic
in connection with the contradictory concepts,
and the further point is made,
a point considered important
that in the negative of a concept
one should only focus on the negative,
taking it as the mere indeterminate extent
of the other of the positive concept.
Thus the mere not-white would be
just as much red, yellow, blue, etc. as black.
White, however, is an unconceptualized determination of intuition;
the not of white is equally, then, unconceptualized not-being,
the abstraction that came in for consideration
at the very beginning of the Logic
where becoming was recognized to be its closest truth.
To use as an example,
in the consideration of judgment determinations,
an unconceptualized content of this sort,
drawn from intuition and the imagination,
and to take the determinations of being, and of reflection,
as such judgment determinations,
is the same uncritical practice as
when Kant applies the concepts of the understanding
to the infinite idea of reason, the so-called thing-in-itself;
the concept, to which the judgment proceeding from it also
belongs, is the true thing-in-itself or the rational;
those other determinations belong to being and essence;
they are not yet forms developed into the shape
where they are in their truth, in the concept.
If we stop at white, red, as representations of the senses,
then we call concept what is only a
determination of pictorial representation.
This is common practice.
But then, surely, the not-white, the not-red,
will be nothing positive,
just as the not-triangular will be
something totally indeterminate,
for a determination based as such on number and quantum is
essentially something indifferent, void of concept.
Yet, like non-being itself, such a sensuous content
ought to be conceptualized;
ought to shed that indifference and abstract immediacy
with which it is affected in the blind immobility
of pictorial representation.
Already in the sphere of immediate existence,
the non-being which is otherwise void of thought becomes limit,
and by virtue of this limit
the something refers to an other despite itself.
In the sphere of reflection, on the other hand,
it is the negative that refers essentially to a positive,
and is thereby determined;
a negative is no longer that indeterminate non-being,
for it is posited to be only to the extent
that the positive stands over against it,
and as third comes their ground;
the negative is thus held circumscribed in a sphere
within which the non-being of one is something determinate.
But it is all the more in the absolutely
fluid continuity of the concept
that the not is immediately a positive,
and the negation is not just determinateness
but is taken up into universality
and is posited as identical with it.
The non-universal is therefore directly the particular.

2. Since negation has to do with the connection of judgment,
and we are considering the negative judgment still as such,
the latter is in the first instance still a judgment;
we thus have the relation of subject and predicate,
or of singularity and universality,
and their connection, the form of the judgment.
The subject, as the immediate underlying basis,
remains untouched by the negation;
it retains, therefore,
its determination of having a predicate,
or its reference to the universality.
Consequently, what is negated in the predicate
is not the universality as such,
but the abstraction or the determinateness
of the predicate that appeared as
content in contrast to that universality.
The negative judgment is not, therefore, total negation;
the universal sphere which contains the predicate remains standing;
the connection of subject and the predicate is
therefore still essentially positive;
the yet remaining determination of
the predicate is no less connection.
When it is said that, for instance,
the rose is not red,
only the determinateness of the predicate is thereby denied
and thus separated from the universality
which equally attaches to it;
the universal sphere, color, is retained;
if the rose is not red,
it is nonetheless assumed that it has a color,
though another color.
From the side of this universal sphere,
the judgment is still positive.

“The singular is a particular.”
This positive form of the negative judgment
immediately expresses that the particular contains universality.
In addition, it also expresses that
the predicate is not just a universal
but also one which is still determinate.
The negative form contains the same,
for although the rose, for instance, is not red,
it is supposed, nevertheless, not only
still to retain the universal sphere of color as predicate,
but to have some other determinate color as well;
the singularity of determinateness
of the rose is therefore only sublated;
and not only is the universal sphere left standing
but determinateness too is retained,
although transformed into an indeterminate determinateness,
a universal determinateness, that is to say, into particularity.

3. The particularity that has resulted as
the positive determination of the negative judgment is
the term mediating singularity and universality;
so the negative judgment is now that which
provides in general the mediation for the third step,
that of the reflection of the judgment of existence into itself.
This judgment is according to its objective meaning
only the moment of the alteration of accidents,
or, in the sphere of existence,
of the singularized properties of the concrete.
Through this alteration, the full determinateness of the predicate,
or the concrete, emerges as posited.

“The singular is particular” is
what the positive expression of the negative judgment says.
But the singular is also not particular,
for particularity is of wider extension than singularity;
it is a predicate, therefore,
that does not correspond to the subject,
one in which the latter,
therefore, does not as yet have its truth.
“The singular is only a singular”:
this is a negativity that refers to nothing else,
be it positive or negative, except itself.
The rose is not a thing of some color or other,
but one that only has the one determinate color
which is the rose-color.
The singular is not an indeterminate determinate
but the determinate determinate.

This negation of the negative judgment appears,
when one starts from its positive form,
to be again a first negation.
But this is not what it is.
The negative judgment is again, in and for itself,
already the second negation or the negation of negation,
and this, what it is in and for itself, is to be posited.
To wit: the judgment negates the determinateness of the predicate
of the positive judgment, its abstract universality,
or, considered as content,
the singular quality that it possesses of the subject.
But the negation of thedeterminateness is
already the second negation,
hence the infinite turning back of
the singularity into itself.
With this, therefore, the restoration of
the concrete totality of the subject has taken place,
or rather, the subject is now for the first time
posited as singular,
for through the negation
and the sublation of that negation
it is mediated with itself.
The predicate, for its part, has thereby passed over
from the first universality to absolute determinateness
and made itself equal to the subject.
Thus the judgment says: “the singular is singular.”
From the other side, since the subject was
equally to be taken as a universal,
and since in the negative judgment the predicate,
which as against that subject is the singular,
expanded into particularity;
moreover, since now the negation
of this determinateness is equally
the purification of the universality
contained in the predicate,
this judgment also says:
“the universal is the universal.”

In these two judgments, which were
earlier obtained through external reflection,
the predicate is already expressed in its positivity.
But the negation of the negative judgment
must itself first appear in the form of a negative judgment.
It has just been shown that there still remained
in this judgment a positive connection of subject and predicate
as well the universal sphere of the latter.
From this side, the negative judgment
thus contains a universality
which is more purified of limitation
than was contained by the positive judgment
and is for this reason all the more
to be negated of the subject as a singular.
In this manner, the whole extent
of the predicate is negated,
and there is no longer any positive connection
between it and the subject.
This is the infinite judgment.

c. The infinite judgment

The negative judgment is as little of a true judgment as the positive.
But the infinite judgment which is supposed to be its truth is,
according to its negative expression, the negative infinite,
a judgment in which even the form of judgment is sublated.
But this is a nonsensical judgment.
It ought to be a judgment,
and hence contains a connection of subject and predicate;
but any such connection ought not at the same time to be there.
The name of the infinite judgment does indeed
occur in the common textbooks of logic,
but without any clarification as to its meaning.
Examples of negatively infinite judgments are easy to come by.
It is a matter of picking determinations,
one of which does not contain not just
the determinateness of the other
but its universal sphere as well,
and of combining them negatively as subject and predicate,
as when we say, for example,
that spirit is not red, yellow, etc.,
is not acid, not alkali, etc.,
or that the rose is not an elephant,
the understanding is not a table, and the like.
These judgments are correct or true,
as it is said, and yet, any such truth
notwithstanding, nonsensical and fatuous.
Or, more to the point, they are not judgments at all.
A more realistic example of
the infinite judgment is the evil action.
In civil litigation, when a thing is negated
as the property of another party,
it is still conceded that the same thing would indeed belong
to that party if the latter had a right to it.
It is only under the title of right
that the possession of it is challenged;
in the negative judgment, therefore,
the universal sphere, “right,” is
still acknowledged and maintained.
But crime is the infinite judgment that negates,
not only the particular right,
but the universal sphere, the right as right.
It has correctness, in the sense that it is an effective action,
but since it stands in a thoroughly negative fashion
with respect to the morality that constitutes its sphere,
it is nonsensical.

The positive element of the infinite judgment,
the negation of the negation,
is the reflection of singularity into itself
by virtue of which the singularity is
first posited as the determinate determinate.
“The singular is singular” is what
the infinite judgment said
according to that reflection.
In the judgment of existence,
the subject is as the immediate singular,
hence more of just a something in general.
Through the mediation of
the negative and infinite judgment,
it is posited as singular for the first time.
The singular is thus posited as
expanding into its predicate,
which is identical with it;
to the same extent, therefore,
universality is also no longer
anything immediate but a summing of distincts.
The positively infinite judgment equally says,
“the universal is universal,”
and in this the universal is posited
also as a turning back into itself.

Now through the reflection of
the judgment determinations into themselves,
the judgment has sublated itself;
in the negatively infinite judgment,
the difference is, so to speak, too great
for it still to remain a judgment;
subject and predicate have no
positive connection whatsoever to each other;
in the positively infinite judgment,
on the contrary, only identity is present,
and because of this total lack of difference
there is no longer a judgment.

More precisely, it is the judgment of existence
that has sublated itself
and, consequently, there is posited
what the copula of the judgment contains,
namely that in its identity
the qualitative extremes are sublated.
But since this unity is the concept,
it is immediately torn apart
and is a judgment,
but one whose terms are
no longer immediately determined
but are reflected into themselves.
The judgment of existence has passed over
into the judgment of reflection.
