
CHAPTER 3

The syllogism

The syllogism is the result of
the restoration of the concept in the judgment,
and consequently the unity and the truth of the two.
The concept as such holds its moments
sublated in this unity;
in judgment, the unity is an internal
or, what amounts to the same, an external one,
and although the moments are connected,
they are posited as self-subsisting extremes.
In the syllogism, the determinations of the concept
are like the extremes of the judgment,
and at the same time their determinate unity is posited.

Thus the syllogism is the completely posited concept;
it is, therefore, the rational.
The understanding is taken to be
the faculty of the determinate concept
which is held fixed for itself by virtue of
abstraction and the form of universality.
But in reason the determinate concepts are
posited in their totality and unity.
Therefore, it is not just that the syllogism is rational
but that everything rational is a syllogism.
Syllogistic inference has long since been ascribed to reason;
but, on the other hand, reason in and for itself,
and rational principles and laws,
are so spoken of that no light is thrown
on why the one reason that syllogizes,
and the other which is the source
of laws and otherwise eternal truths
and absolute thoughts, hang together.
If the former is supposed to be
only a formal reason
while the latter is supposed to be
the one that generates content,
then one would expect on this distinction
that precisely the form of reason,
the inference, would not be missing in the latter.
And yet, the two are commonly held so far apart,
the one without mention of the other,
that it seems as though the reason
of absolute thoughts were ashamed,
so to speak, of inferential reason,
and the syllogism were listed as also
an activity of reason merely as matter of tradition.
But surely, as we have just remarked,
logical reason must be essentially recognizable,
when regarded as formal, also in the reason
that is concerned with a content;
indeed, no content can be rational
except by virtue of the rational form.
In this matter we cannot rely on
what is commonly said about reason,
for common views fail to tell us
what we are to understand by reason;
this would-be rational wisdom is so busy with its objects
that it forgets to pay attention to reason itself
but only identifies it by characterizing it
through the objects that it is said to have.
If reason is supposed to be a cognition
that would know about God, freedom, right and duty,
the infinite, the unconditional, the suprasensible,
or even gives only representations and feelings of such objects,
then for one thing these objects are only negative,
and for another the original question still stands,
what is there in all these objects that makes them rational?
The answer is that the infinitude in them
is not the empty abstraction from the finite,
is not a universality which is void of content and determination,
but is the fulfilled universality, the concept which is determined
and is truly in possession of its determinateness,
namely, in that it differentiates itself internally
and is the unity of its thus intelligible and determined differences.
Only in this way does reason rise above
the finite, the conditioned, the sensuous,
or however one might define it,
and is in this negativity essentially replete with content,
for as unity it is the unity of determinate extremes.
And so the rational is nothing but the syllogism.

Now the syllogism, like judgment, is at first immediate;
as such, its determinations (termini) are
simple, abstract determinacies;
it is then the syllogism of the understanding.
If one stays at this configuration of the syllogism,
then its rationality, though present there and posited,
is not apparent.
The essential element of the syllogism is
the unity of the extremes,
the middle term that unites them
and the ground that supports them.
Abstraction, by holding fast to
the self-subsistence of the extremes,
posits this unity opposite them,
as a determinateness with just as fixed
an existence of its own,
thus grasping it more as a non-unity than as a unity.
The expression, “middle term” (medius terminus),
is derived from spatial representation,
and has its share of responsibility for
why we stop short at the externality of the terms.
Now if the syllogism consists in
the positing in it of the unity of the extremes,
but if this unity is simply taken
on the one hand as a particular by itself,
and on the other hand as only an external connection,
and non-unity is made the essential relation of syllogism,
then the reason of the syllogism is of no help to rationality.

First, the syllogism of existence,
in which the terms are thus
immediately and abstractly determined,
demonstrates internally that,
since like judgment it is
the connection of those terms,
these are not in fact abstract
but each contains in it the reference
connecting it to the others,
and the determination of the middle term is
not just a determinateness opposed to the
determinations of the extremes
but contains these extremes posited in it.

Through this dialectic,
the syllogism of existence becomes
the syllogism of reflection, the second syllogism.
Its terms are such that in each the other
shines essentially reflected in it,
or are posited as mediated,
as they are indeed supposed to be
in accordance with the nature of
syllogistic inference in general.

Third, inasmuch as this reflective shining
or this mediatedness is reflected into itself,
syllogism is determined as the syllogism of necessity,
one in which the mediating factor is
the objective nature of the fact.
As this syllogism determines the extremes
of the concept also as totalities,
it has attained the correspondence
of its concept (or the middle term)
and its existence (or the difference of the extremes).
It has attained its truth;
and with that it has stepped forth
out of subjectivity into objectivity.
