
CHAPTER 1

The concept as such

The faculty of concepts is normally
associated with the understanding,
and the latter is accordingly distinguished
from the faculty of judgment
and from the faculty of syllogistic inferences
which is formal reason.
But it is particularly with reason
that the understanding is contrasted,
and it signifies then, not the faculty of concepts in general,
but the faculty of determinate concepts,
as if, as the prevailing opinion has it,
the concept were only a determinate.
When distinguished in this meaning
from the formal faculty of judgment and from formal reason,
the understanding is accordingly to be taken
as the faculty of the single determinate concept.
For the judgment and the syllogism or reason, as formal,
are themselves only a thing of the understanding,
since they are subsumed under the form
of the abstract determinateness of the concept.
Here, however, we are definitely not taking
the concept as just abstractly determined;
the understanding is therefore
to be distinguished from reason only
in that it is the faculty of the concept as such.

This universal concept that we now have to consider
contains the three moments of
universality, particularity, and singularity.
The difference and the determinations which the concept
gives itself in its process of distinguishing constitute
the sides formerly called positedness.
Since this positedness is in the concept
identical with being-in-and-for-itself,
each of the moments is just as much
the whole concept as it is determinate concept
and a determination of the concept.

It is at first pure concept,
or the determination of universality.
But the pure or universal concept is also
only a determinate or particular concept
that takes its place alongside the other concepts.
Because the concept is a totality,
and therefore in its universality
or pure identical self-reference
is essentially a determining and a distinguishing,
it possesses in itself the norm
by which this form of its self-identity,
in pervading all the moments
and comprehending them within,
equally determines itself immediately
as being only the universal
as against the distinctness of the moments.

Second, the concept is thereby posited
as this particular or determinate concept,
distinct from others.

Third, singularity is the concept reflecting itself
out of difference into absolute negativity.
This is at the same time the moment at which
it has stepped out of its identity
into its otherness and becomes judgment.
