
C. THE SINGULAR

Singularity, as we have seen, is
already posited through particularity;
this is determinate universality
and hence self-referring determinateness,
the determinate determinate.

1. At first, therefore, singularity appears
as the reflection of the concept
out of its determinateness into itself.
It is the concept's self-mediation by virtue of which,
since its otherness has once more been made into an other,
it restores itself as self-equal,
but in the determination of absolute negativity.
The negative in the universal,
by virtue of which this universal is a particular,
was earlier determined as a doubly reflective shine.
In so far as the reflective shining is inward,
the particular remains a universal;
through the outward shining,
it is a determinate particular;
the turning back of this side
into the universal is twofold,
either by virtue of an abstraction
that lets the particular fall away
and climbs to a higher and the highest genus,
or by virtue of the singularity
to which the universality in
the determinateness itself descends.
Here is where the false start is made
that makes abstraction stray away
from the way of the concept,
abandoning the truth.
Its higher and highest universal
to which it rises is  only a surface
that becomes progressively more void of content;
the singularity which it scorns is
the depth in which the concept grasps itself
and where it is posited as concept.

Universality and particularity appeared, on the one hand,
as moments of the becoming of singularity.
But it has already been shown that the two are
in themselves the total concept;
consequently, that in singularity they do
not pass over into an other
but that, on the contrary,
what is posited in it is
what they are in and for themselves.
The universal is for itself because it
is absolute mediation in itself,
self-reference only as absolute negativity.
It is an abstract universal
inasmuch as this sublating is an external act
and so a dropping off of the determinateness.
This negativity, therefore, attaches indeed
to the abstract universal,
but it remains outside it,
as a mere condition of it;
it is the abstraction itself
that holds its universal opposite it,
and so the universal does not
have singularity in itself
and remains void of concept.
Life, spirit, God, as well as the pure concept,
are for this reason beyond the grasp of abstraction,
for abstraction keeps singularity away from its products,
and singularity is the principle of
individuality and personality.
And so it comes to nothing but lifeless universalities,
void of spirit, color, and content.

But the unity of the concept is so indissoluble
that these products of abstraction also,
though they are supposed to drop singularity,
are rather themselves singulars.
For in elevating the concrete to universality,
abstraction grasps the universal
as only a determinate universality,
and this is precisely the singularity
that presented itself as self-referring determinateness.
Thus abstraction is a partitioning of the concrete
and an isolating of its determinations;
only singular properties or moments are picked out by it,
for its product must contain what it itself is.
But the difference between this
singularity of its products
and the singularity of the concept is
that in the former the singular and the universal differ
from each other as content and form respectively,
precisely because the content is not the absolute form,
is not the concept itself,
or this form is not the totality of form.
However, this closer consideration shows
that the product of abstraction is
itself the unity of the singular content
and of abstract universality,
therefore that it is something concrete,
the opposite of what it is supposed to be.

The particular, for the same reason that
makes it only a determinate universal,
is also a singular, and conversely,
because the singular is a determinate universal,
it is equally a particular.
If we stay at this abstract determinateness,
then the concept has the
three particular determinations of
universal, particular, and singular,
whereas earlier we gave only
the universal and the particular as
species of the particular.
Because singularity is the turning of
the concept as a negative back to itself,
this turning back from abstraction,
which in the turning is truly sublated,
can itself be placed as an indifferent
moment alongside the others
and be counted with them.

If singularity is listed as one of the
particular determinations of the concept,
then particularity is the totality
which embraces them all
and, precisely as this totality,
it is the concretion of the determinations
or singularity itself.
But it is a concrete also according
to the previously mentioned side,
as determinate universality;
and then it is the immediate unity
in which none of these moments is posited
as distinct or as the determinant,
and in this form it will constitute
the middle term of the formal syllogism.

It follows that each of the determinations
established in the preceding exposition of the concept
has immediately dissolved itself
and has lost itself in its other.
Each distinction is confounded
in the course of the very reflection
that should isolate it and hold it fixed.
Only a way of thinking that is merely representational,
for which abstraction has isolated them,
is capable of holding the universal, the particular,
and the singular rigidly apart.
Then they can be counted;
and for a further distinction
this representation relies on one
which is entirely external to being,
on their quantity,
and nowhere is such a distinction as inappropriate as here.
In singularity, the earlier true relation,
the inseparability of the determinations of the concept,
is posited;
for as the negation of negation,
singularity contains the opposition
of those determinations
and this opposition itself at its ground
or the unity where the determinations have
come together, each in the other.
Because in this reflection
universality is in and for itself,
singularity is essentially the negativity of
the determinations of the concept,
but not merely as if it stood as
a third something distinct from them,
but because what is now posited is
that positedness is being-in-and-for-itself;
that is, what is posited is that
each of the distinct determinations is the totality.
The turning back of the determinate concept into itself
means that its determination is to be
in its determinateness the whole concept.

2. Singularity is not, however, only the turning back
of the concept into itself, but the immediate loss of it.
Through singularity, where it is internal to itself,
the concept becomes external to itself and steps into actuality.
Abstraction, which is the soul of singularity
and so the self-reference of the negative,
is, as we have seen, nothing external to
the universal and the particular
but is immanent in them,
and these are concreted through it,
they become a content, a singular.
But, as this negativity, singularity is
the determinate determinateness, differentiation as such,
and through this reflection of the difference into itself,
the difference becomes fixed;
the determining of the particular occurs
only by virtue of singularity,
for singularity is that abstraction which,
precisely as singularity,
is now posited abstraction.

The singular, therefore, is as self-referring negativity
the immediate identity of the negative with itself;
it exists for itself.
Or it is the abstraction determining
the concept as an immediate,
according to its ideal moment of being.
Thus the singular is a one which is qualitative, or a this.
In accordance with this qualitative character, it is,
first, the repulsion of itself from itself
by virtue of which many other ones are presupposed;
second, it is now a negative reference
with respect to these presupposed others,
and to this extent the singular is exclusive.
Universality, when referred to
these singulars as indifferent ones
and it must be referred to them,
for they are a moment of the concept of singularity,
is only their commonality.
If by the universal one understands
that which is common to several singulars,
the indifferent subsistence of these singulars is
then taken as the starting point,
thus mixing in the immediacy of being
into the determination of the concept.
The lowest conception one can have of
the universal as connected with the singular
is this external relation that it has
to the latter as a mere commonality.

The singular, which in the reflective sphere
of concrete existence is as a this,
does not have the excluding reference
to the other that is characteristic
of qualitative being-for-itself.
A this is a one reflected into itself, without repulsion;
or the repulsion is in this reflection one with abstraction,
a reflective mediation present in the this
that makes it a posited immediacy
pointed at by someone external to it.
The this is; it is immediate, it is a this,
however, only in so far as it is pointed at.
This “pointing at” is the reflective movement
that takes hold of itself and posits the immediacy,
but as something external to itself.
Now the singular surely is also a this,
as an immediate which is the result of mediation,
but does not have this mediation outside it;
it is itself repelling separation, posited abstraction,
yet is, precisely in its separation, a positive connection.

This act of abstraction by the singular is,
as the immanent reflection of difference,
the first positing of the differences as self-subsisting,
reflected into themselves.
They exist immediately;
but, further, this separating is reflection in general,
the reflective shining of one in the other;
the differences thus stand in essential relation.
They are, moreover, not singulars that
just exist next to each other;
a plurality of this kind belongs to being;
the singularity that posits itself as determinate
does not posit itself in an external difference
but in a difference of the concept;
singularity thus excludes the universal from itself,
but since this universal is a moment of it,
it refers to it just as essentially.

The concept, as this connection of
its self-subsistent determinations,
has lost itself,
for the concept itself is no longer
the posited unity of these determinations,
and these no longer are moments,
the reflective shining of the concept,
but subsist rather in and for themselves.
As singularity, the concept returns
in determinateness into itself,
and therewith the determinate has
itself become totality.
The concept's turning back into itself is
thus the absolute, originative partition of itself,
that is, as singularity it is posited as judgment.
