
Introduction

GENERAL CONCEPT OF LOGIC

In no science is the need to begin with the fact [Sache] itself,
without preliminary reflections, felt more strongly
than in the science of logic.
In every other science, the matter that it treats,
and the scientific method, are distinguished from each other;
the content, moreover, does not make an absolute beginning
but is dependent on other concepts
and is connected on all sides with other material.
It is therefore permitted to these sciences
to speak of their ground and its context,
as well of their method, in the form of lemmas;
to apply presupposed forms of definitions and the like
without further ado, as known and accepted;
and to make use of customary ways of argumentation in order to
establish their general concepts and fundamental determinations.

Logic, on the contrary, cannot presuppose any of these forms of reflection,
these rules and laws of thinking, for they are part of its content
and they first have to be established within it.
And it is not just the declaration of scientific method
but the concept itself of science as such that belongs to its content
and even makes up its final result.
Logic, therefore, cannot say what it is in advance,
rather does this knowledge of itself only emerge as
the final result and completion of its whole treatment.
Likewise its subject matter, thinking
or more specifically conceptual thinking,
is essentially elaborated within it;
its concept is generated in the course of this elaboration
and cannot therefore be given in advance.
What is anticipated in this Introduction, therefore,
is not intended to ground as it were the concept of logic,
or to justify in advance its content and method scientifically,
but rather to make more intuitable,
by means of some explanations and reflections
of an argumentative and historical nature,
the standpoint from which this science ought to be considered.

Whenever logic is taken as the science of thinking in general,
it is thereby understood that this “thinking” constitutes
the mere form of a cognition;
that logic abstracts from all content,
and the so-called second constitutive piece
that belongs to the cognition, namely the matter,
must be given from elsewhere;
hence that logic, since this matter does not in the least depend on it,
can give only the formal conditions of genuine knowledge,
but does not itself contain real truth;
or again, that logic is only the pathway to real knowledge,
for the essential component of truth, the content, lies outside it.

But, first, to say that logic abstracts from all content,
that it only teaches the rule of thinking
without being able to engage in what is being thought
or to take its composition into consideration,
this alone is already inadequate.
For, since thinking and the rules of thinking are
supposed to be its subject matter,
in these logic already has a content specifically its own;
in them it has that second constituent of knowledge,
namely a matter whose composition is its concern.
But, second, the notions on which the concept of logic
has generally rested so far have in part already passed away,
and for the rest, it is time that they disappear altogether,
that the standpoint of this science were grasped at a higher level,
and that the science gained a completely altered shape.

The concept of logic has hitherto rested on a separation,
presupposed once and for all in ordinary consciousness,
of the content of knowledge and its form,
or of truth and certainty.
Presupposed from the start is that the material of knowledge
is present in and for itself as a ready-made world outside thinking;
that thinking is by itself empty,
that it comes to this material as a form from outside,
fills itself with it, and only then gains a content,
thereby becoming real knowledge.

Further, these two component parts
(for they are supposed to be related to each other as component parts,
and cognition is compounded from them in a mechanical,
or at best chemical, manner)
are said to stand to each other in this order:
the object is complete and finished all by itself
and, for its actuality, can fully dispense with thought;
thought, for its part, is something deficient
and in need of a material in order to complete itself,
and also, as a pliable indeterminate form,
must adapt itself to its matter.
Truth is the agreement of thought with the subject matter,
and in order to produce this agreement –
for it is not there on its own account –
thought is expected to be subservient
and responsive to the subject matter.

Third, when the difference of matter and form,
of subject matter and thought,
is not left in this nebulous indeterminacy
but is more specifically defined,
each turns out to be a sphere divorced from the other.
Consequently, as thought receives and informs the material,
it does not transcend itself but its reception of this material
and its responsiveness to it remain modifications of itself;
thus thought does not become its other;
the self-conscious determining, at any rate, belongs only to it;
even as it refers to the subject matter,
therefore, it does not reach out to it outside itself;
the subject matter remains a thing in itself,
utterly a “beyond” of thought.

These views on the relation of subject and object to each other
express the determinations that constitute the nature of
our ordinary, phenomenal consciousness.
However, when these prejudices are carried over to reason,
as if in reason the same relation obtained,
as if this relation had any truth in and for itself,
then they are errors, and the refutation of them
in every part of the spiritual and natural universe
is what philosophy is;
or rather, since they block the entrance to philosophy,
they are the errors that must be removed before one can enter it.

The older metaphysics had in this respect a higher concept of thinking
than now passes as the accepted opinion.
For it presupposed as its principle that only what is known
of things and in things by thought is really true in them, that is,
what is known in them not in their immediacy
but as first elevated to the form of thinking, as things of thought.
This metaphysics thus held that thinking and the determination of thinking
are not something alien to the subject matters,
but are rather their essence,
or that the things and the thinking of them agree in and for themselves
(also our language expresses a kinship between them);
that thinking in its immanent determinations,
and the true nature of things, are one and the same content.

But the reflection of the understanding seized hold of philosophy.
We must know exactly what is meant by this saying
which is otherwise often used as a slogan.
It refers in general to an understanding
that abstracts and therefore separates,
that remains fixed in its separations.
Turned against reason, this understanding behaves
in the manner of ordinary common sense,
giving credence to the latter’s view
that truth rests on sensuous reality,
that thoughts are only thoughts, that is,
that only sense perception gives filling and reality to them;
that reason, in so far as it abides in and for itself,
generates only mental figments.
In this self-renunciation of reason,
the concept of truth is lost,
is restricted to the knowledge of
mere subjective truth, of mere appearances,
of only something to which
the nature of the fact does not correspond;
knowledge has lapsed into opinion.

Yet there is something deeper lying at the foundation
of this turn which knowledge takes,
and appears as a loss and a retrograde step,
something on which the elevation of reason
to the loftier spirit of modern philosophy in fact rests.
The basis of that conception now universally accepted is
to be sought, namely, in the insight into the necessary conflict of
the determinations of the understanding with themselves. –
The reflection already mentioned consists
in transcending the concrete immediate,
in determining and parting it.
But this reflection must equally
transcend its separating determinations
and above all connect them.
The conflict of determinations breaks out
precisely at the point of connection.
This reflective activity of connection
belongs in itself to reason,
and to rise above the determinations
and attain insight into their discord is
the great negative step on the way to the true concept of reason.
But, when not carried through, this insight runs into the misconception
that reason is the one that contradicts itself;
it fails to see that the contradiction is in fact
the elevation of reason above the restrictions of
the understanding and the dissolution of them.
At that point, instead of making the final step
that would take it to the summit,
knowledge flees from the unsatisfactoriness of
the determinations of the understanding to sensuous existence,
believing that there it will find stability and accord.
On the other hand, since this cognition is self-admittedly
a cognition only of appearances,
the unsatisfactoriness of the latter is admitted
but at the same time presupposed:
as much as to say that although we do not have
cognition of things in themselves,
nevertheless, within the sphere of appearance
we do have correct cognition;
as if, so to speak, there were a difference
only in the kind of subject matters
and one kind, namely the things in themselves,
does not fall within the scope of knowledge
whereas the other kind, namely the appearances, does.
This is like attributing right insight to someone,
with the stipulation, however, that he is not fit to see
what is true but only what is false.
Absurd as this might be, no less absurd would be a cognition
which is true but does not know its subject matter
as it is in itself.

The critique of the forms of the understanding
has arrived precisely at this result,
namely that such forms do not apply to things in themselves. –
This can only mean that they are in themselves something untrue.
However, since they have been allowed
to remain valid for reason and experience, the
critique has not altered them in any way
but rather has let them be for the subject
in the same shape as they formerly applied to the object.
But if they are inadequate for the thing in itself,
still less must the understanding to which they supposedly belong
have to put up with them and rest content with them.
If they cannot be determinations of the thing in itself,
still less can they be determinations of the understanding,
to which one ought to concede at least the dignity of a thing.
The determinations of finite and infinite run into the same conflict,
whether they are applied to time and space, to the world,
or are determinations internal to the spirit –
just as black and white yield gray,
whether they are mixed on a wall or on a palette.
If our representation of the world is dissolved
when we carry over to it the determinations of the infinite and finite,
still more is spirit itself,
which contains both determinations within itself,
something inwardly selfcontradictory, self-dissolving. –
It is not the nature of the material
or of the subject matter to which they are applied
or in which they are found that can make a difference;
for it is only through such determinations,
and in accordance with them,
that the subject matter has contradiction within it.

The said critique has therefore removed the forms
of objective thinking only from the thing,
but has left them in the subject as it originally found them.
That is to say, it did not consider them in and for themselves,
according to their proper content,
but simply took them over from subjective logic in the manner of lemmas.
There was no question, therefore, of an immanent deduction of such forms,
or also of deducing them as logico-subjective forms,
still less, of a dialectical treatment of them.

In its more consistent form, transcendental idealism did recognize
the nothingness of the spectral thing-in-itself,
this abstract shadow divorced from all content
left over by critical philosophy,
and its goal was to destroy it completely.
This philosophy also made a start at letting
reason produce its determinations from itself.
But the subjective attitude assumed in the attempt
prevented it from coming to fruition.
This attitude and, together with it, the attempt
and the cultivation of pure science were eventually abandoned.

But what is commonly understood by logic is considered
with a total disregard of metaphysical significance.
This science, in the state in which it still finds itself,
has admittedly no content of the kind which
ordinary consciousness accept as reality, or as a genuine fact.
But it is not for that reason a formal science void of any material truth.
Besides, the region of truth is not to be sought
in that material missing in it –
a lack to which the insufficiency of logic is usually attributed.
More to the point is that the emptiness of the logical forms lies
rather solely in the manner in which they are considered and dealt with.
Scattered in fixed determinations
and thus not held together in organic unity,
they are dead forms and the spirit
which is their vital concrete unity does not reside in them.
Therefore they lack proper content –
a matter that would in itself be substance.
The content which is missed in the logical forms is
nothing else than a fixed foundation
and a concretion of these abstract determinations,
and such a substantial being is usually sought for them outside them.
But logical reason is itself the substantial or real factor
which, within itself, holds together all the abstract determinations
and constitutes their proper, absolutely concrete, unity.
There is no need, therefore, to look far and wide
for what is usually called a matter;
it is not the fault of the subject matter of logic
if the latter seems empty but only of
the manner in which this subject matter is grasped.

This reflection brings us to a statement of
the standpoint from which logic is to be considered,
of how this standpoint differs from previous treatments of this science
and is alone the true base on which the science is to rest in the future.

In the Phenomenology of Spirit I have presented consciousness
as it progresses from the first immediate opposition
of itself and the subject matter to absolute knowledge.
This path traverses all the forms of
the relation of consciousness to the object
and its result is the concept of science.
There is no need, therefore, to justify this concept here
(apart from the fact that it emerges within logic itself ).
It has already been justified in the other work,
and would indeed not be capable of any
other justification than is produced by consciousness
as all its shapes dissolve into that concept as into their truth. –
A discursive justification or explanation of the concept of science
can yield at best a general notion of it and a historical acquaintance;
but a definition of science – or more precisely of logic –
has its proof only in the necessity of the manner
it is produced by consciousness as just mentioned.
Any definition with which a science makes an absolute beginning
can contain nothing else than the precise and correct expression
of what is represented in one’s mind as
the traditionally accepted subject matter
and purpose of the science.
That just this subject matter and this purpose are
so represented is a historicalwarrant for invoking
such or such fact as conceded,
or, more precisely, only for pleading that
such or such fact should be accepted as conceded.
There will always be the possibility that someone else
will adduce a case, an instance,
in which something more and different
must be understood by some term or other –
a term which is therefore to be defined in a narrower or broader sense
and the science, too, will have to be refashioned accordingly. –
Further still, definition is always a matter of argumentation
as to what is to be included in it or excluded from it,
within which limits and to what extent;
but argumentation is open to the most manifold and various opinions,
and on these a decision can finally be determined only arbitrarily.
In this method of beginning science with a definition,
no mention is made of the need to demonstrate
the necessity of its subject matter,
and hence the necessity of the science itself.

The concept of pure science and its deduction is therefore presupposed
in the present work in so far as the Phenomenology of Spirit is
nothing other than that deduction.
Absolute knowledge is the truth of all the modes of consciousness because,
as the course of the Phenomenology brought out,
it is only in absolute knowledge that the separation of the subject matter
from the certainty of itself is completely resolved:
truth has become equal to certainty and this certainty to truth.

Pure science thus presupposes the liberation
from the opposition of consciousness.
It contains thought in so far as this thought is
equally the fact as it is in itself;
or the fact in itself in so far as this is equally pure thought.
As science, truth is pure self-consciousness as it develops itself
and has the shape of the self,
so that that which exists in and for itself is the conscious concept
and the concept as such is that which exists in and for itself.

This objective thinking is thus the content of pure science.
Consequently, far from being formal,
far from lacking the matter required for
an actual and true cognition,
it is its content which alone has absolute truth, or,
if one still wanted to make use of the word “matter,”
which alone is the veritable matter –
a matter for which the form is nothing external,
because this matter is rather pure thought
and hence the absolute form itself.
Accordingly, logic is to be understood as
the system of pure reason,
as the realm of pure thought.
This realm is truth unveiled,
truth as it is in and for itself.
It can therefore be said that this content is
the exposition of God as he is in his eternal essence
before the creation of nature and of a finite spirit.

Anaxagoras is celebrated as the man who first gave voice to
the thought that Nous, thought, is the principle of the world;
that the essence of the world is to be defined as thought.
In this, he laid down the foundation for
an intellectual view of the universe,
the pure shape of which must be logic.
Logic has nothing to do with a thought about something
which stands outside by itself as the base of thought;
nor does it have to do with forms meant
to provide mere markings of the truth;
rather, the necessary forms of thinking,
and its specific determinations,
are the content and the ultimate truth itself.

To get at least some inkling of this,
one must put aside the notion
that truth must be something tangible.
Such tangibility, for example, is carried over
even into the ideas of Plato
which are in God’s thought, as if they were,
so to speak, things that exist
but in another world or region,
and a world of actuality were to be found outside them
which has a substantiality distinct from those ideas
and is real only because of this distinctness.
The Platonic idea is nothing else than the universal,
or, more precisely, it is the concept of the subject matter;
it is only in the concept that something has actuality,
and to the extent that it is different from its concept,
it ceases to be actual and is a nullity;
the side of tangibility and of sensuous self-externality
belongs to this null side. –
But on the other side one can appeal to
the representations typical of ordinary logic;
for it is assumed that in definitions, for example,
the determinations are not just of the knowing subject
but are rather determinations of the subject matter,
such that constitute its innermost essential nature.
Or in an inference drawn from given determinations to others,
the assumption is that the inferred is not something
external to the subject matter and alien to it,
but that it belongs to it instead,
that to the thought there corresponds being. –
Everywhere presupposed by the use of the forms
of the concept, of judgment, inference, definition, division, etc.,
is that they are not mere forms of self-conscious thinking
but also of objective understanding. –
Thought is an expression which attributes the
determination contained in it primarily to consciousness.
But inasmuch as it is said that understanding,
that reason, is in the objective world,
that spirit and nature have universal laws
to which their life and their changes conform,
then it is conceded just as much that
the determinations of thought have
objective value and concrete existence.

Critical philosophy did indeed already turn metaphysics into logic
but, like the subsequent idealism, it gave to the logical determinations
an essentially subjective significance out of fear of the object,
as we said earlier;
for that reason, these determinations remained affected
by the very object that they avoided,
and were left with the remains of a thing-in-itself,
an infinite check, as a beyond.
But the liberation from the opposition of consciousness
that science must be able to presuppose
elevates the determinations of thought
above this anxious, incomplete standpoint,
and demands that they be considered for
what they are in and for themselves
without any such cautious restriction,
as the logical, the purely rational.

Kant thought further of logic, that is,
the aggregate of definitions and propositions
that ordinarily passes for logic, as fortunate because,
as contrasted with other sciences,
it was its lot to attain an early completion;
since Aristotle, it has taken no backward step,
but also none forward, the latter because
to all appearances it seems to be finished and complete.
If logic has not undergone change since Aristotle –
and in fact, judging from the latest compendiums of logic,
the usual changes mostly consist only of omissions –
then surely the conclusion to be drawn is that
it is all the more in need of a total reworking;
for the two thousand years of spirit’s continuous labor
must have procured for it a higher consciousness about its thinking
and the purity of its inner essence.
A comparison of the shapes to which
the spirit of the practical and the religious world,
and of science in every form of real or idealized consciousness,
has raised itself, with the shape in which logic,
spirit’s consciousness of its own pure essence, finds itself,
reveals too wide a difference that one would not be struck,
even on the most superficial observation,
by the disproportion and the unworthiness
of the latter consciousness as  contrasted with spirit’s other elevations.

As a matter of fact, the need for
a reformation of logic has long been felt.
In the form and content in which it is found in the textbooks,
it must be said that it has fallen into disrepute.
It is still being dragged along, more from a feeling that
one cannot dispense with a logic altogether
and the persisting traditional belief in its importance,
than from any conviction that such a commonplace content
and the occupation with such empty forms are of any value or use.

The additions of psychological, pedagogical,
and even physiological material
which logic was at one time given,
have later been almost universally recognized as disfigurations.
A large part of these psychological, pedagogical,
or physiological observations,
of these laws and rules,
whether they occur in logic or anywhere else,
must appear in and for themselves to be quite shallow and trivial.
The rule, for instance, that one should think through
and personally test what one reads in books or hears by word of mouth;
or, if one has poor sight, that one should
aid the eyes with spectacles –
rules which were offered for the attainment of truth
in the textbooks of so-called applied logic,
and even pompously set out in paragraphs
– these must immediately strike everyone as superfluous –
apart from the writer or the teacher
who is in the embarrassing position
of having to pad with extra material
the otherwise too short and lifeless content
goes back to its anthropological foundations.
The shallowness of the representation or opinion
on which it is based, in and of itself,
and of the execution,
dispenses me from the trouble of taking any notice of
this insignificant publication.

Regarding this content, the reason why it is so spiritless
has already been given above.
Its determinations are accepted in their undisturbed fixity
and are brought together only in external connection.
Since in judgments and syllogisms the operations are mostly reduced to,
and founded upon, the quantitative aspect of the determinations,
everything rests on external differentiation, on mere comparison,
and becomes a completely analytical procedure and a calculus void of concept.
The deduction of the so-called rules and laws, of inference especially,
is no better than the manipulation of rods of unequal lengths
for sorting them out in groups according to size –
than a children’s game of fitting together
the pieces of a colored picture puzzle. –
Not incorrectly, therefore, has this thinking been
equated with reckoning, and reckoning again with this thinking.
In mathematics, numbers have no conceptual content,
no meaning outside equality or inequality,
that is, outside relations which are entirely external;
neither in themselves nor in connection are they a thought.
When one mechanically calculates that
three-fourths multiplied by two-thirds makes one-half,
this operation contains about as much and as little thought
as estimating whether in a logical figure
this or that kind of syllogism applies.

For the dead bones of logic to be quickened by spirit
and become substance and content,
its method must be the one which alone
can make it fit to be pure science.
In the present situation of logic,
hardly a trace of scientific method is to be seen in it.
It has roughly the form of an empirical science.
The empirical sciences did find a method of
defining and classifying their material specifically suited,
such as it is, to what they are supposed to be.
Pure mathematics, too, has its method suited
to its abstract objects and the quantitative form
in which alone it considers them.
In the Preface to the Phenomenology of Spirit,
I have said what is essential regarding this method
and, in general, the derived form of scientific procedure
proper to mathematics,
but we shall return to it in more detail within the logic itself.
Spinoza, Wolff, and others, have let themselves be led astray
into applying that method also to philosophy
and in making the conceptually void external course of quantity,
the course of the concept –
a move contradictory in and for itself.
Hitherto philosophy had yet to find its method
but looked with envy at the systematic
edifice of mathematics
and, as we have said, borrowed it from it
or helped itself with the method of sciences
which are only an admixture of given material,
propositions of experience and thoughts –
or it even resorted to the crude rejection of all method.
But the exposition of that which alone can be
the true method of philosophical science
falls within the treatment of logic itself;
for method is the consciousness of the form
of the inner self-movement of the content of logic.
In the Phenomenology of Spirit, I have presented
an example of this method with respect
to a concrete object, namely consciousness.
At issue there are shapes of consciousness,
each of which dissolves itself in being realized,
has its own negation for result –
and thereby has gone over to a higher shape.
The one thing needed to achieve scientific progress –
and it is essential to make an
effort at gaining this quite simple insight into it –
is the recognition of the logical principle
that negation is equally positive,
or that what is self-contradictory
does not resolve itself into a nullity,
into abstract nothingness,
but essentially only into the negation
of its particular content;
or that such a negation is not just negation,
but is the negation of the determined fact which is resolved,
and is therefore determinate negation;
that in the result there is therefore contained in essence
that from which the result derives –
a tautology indeed, since the result
would otherwise be something immediate and not a result.
Because the result, the negation,
is a determinate negation, it has a content.
It is a new concept but one higher and richer than the preceding –
richer because it negates or opposes the preceding
and therefore contains it,
and it contains even more than that,
for it is the unity of itself and its opposite. –
It is above all in this way that
the system of concepts is to be to erected –
and it has to come to completion
in an unstoppable and pure progression
that admits of nothing extraneous.

How could I possibly pretend that the method
that I follow in this system of logic,
or rather the method that this system itself follows within,
would not be capable of greater perfection,
of greater elaboration of detail?
Yet I know that it is the one and only true method.
This is made obvious by the very fact that this method is not something
distinct from its subject matter and content –
for it is the content in itself,
the dialectic which it possesses within itself,
which moves the subject matter forward.
It is clear that no expositions can be accepted as scientifically valid
that do not follow the progression of this method
and are not in tune with its simple rhythm,
for it is the course of the fact itself.

In keeping with this method, I remind the reader that
the divisions and the headings of the books,
the sections and chapters given in this work,
as well as the explanations associated with them,
are made for the purpose of a preliminary overview,
and that strictly speaking they only are of historical value.
They do not belong to the content and body of the science
but are rather compilations of an external reflection
which has already gone through the whole of the exposition,
therefore knows the sequence of its moments in advance
and anticipates them before they are brought on by the matter at issue itself.

Similarly in other sciences, preliminary definitions and divisions are
by themselves nothing other than such external indications;
but also within the science they never exceed this status.
Even in logic, for example, we are told something like this,
that “logic has two main parts, the doctrine of the elements and methodology,”
and under the doctrine of the elements we then immediately find
such headings as “Laws of Thinking,” followed by Chapter One,
“On Concepts,” Section One, “On the Clarity of Concepts,” etc. –
These definitions and divisions, made without any deduction and justification,
constitute the systematic framework
and the entire connectedness of such sciences.
Such a logic considers it its vocation to talk about
the necessity of deducing concepts and truths from principles;
however, of what they call method, there is not the shadow of a deduction.
Order consists in something like grouping together what is alike,
in bringing in the simple ahead of the composite,
and in other such external considerations.
But as regards any internal, necessary connectedness,
the list of headings is all that there is,
and a transition is made simply by saying that
now we are at “Chapter Two,”
or that “we now come to judgments,” and the like.

Also the headings and divisions that appear in the present system
are not intended to have for themselves any other significance
than that of an indication of content.
But then the necessity of the connectedness
and the immanent emergence of distinctions
must be found in the treatment of the fact itself,
for it falls within the concept’s own progressive determination.

What propels the concept onward is the already mentioned
negative which it possesses in itself;
it is this that constitutes the truly dialectical factor.
Dialectic, once considered a separate part of logic and, one may say,
entirely misunderstood so far as its purpose and standpoint are concerned,
thereby assumes a totally different position. –
Even the Platonic dialectic, in the Parmenides itself
and elsewhere even more directly,
on the one hand only has the aim of refuting limited assertions
by internally dissolving them
and, on the other hand, generally comes only to a negative result.
Dialectic is commonly regarded as an external and negative activity
which does not belong to the fact itself
but is rooted in mere conceit,
in a subjective obsession for
subverting and bringing to naught everything firm and true,
or at least as in resultingin nothing but the vanity of
the subject matter subjected to dialectical treatment.

Kant had a higher regard for dialectic –
and this is among his greatest merits –
for he removed from it the semblance of arbitrariness
which it has in ordinary thought
and presented it as a necessary operation of reason.
Because dialectic was held to be merely the art of
practicing deceptions and producing illusions,
it was straight away assumed that it plays a false game;
that its whole power rests solely on hiding its deception;
that its results are only deviously obtained, a subjective shine.
True, Kant’s dialectical displays in the antinomies of pure reason,
when examined more closely as will be done at length
in the course of this work,
do not deserve great praise;
but the general idea to which he gave justification and credence is
the objectivity of reflective shine
and the necessity of the contradiction
which belongs to the nature of thought determinations:
of course, this he did above all with reference to the way
in which these determinations are applied
by reason to the things in themselves;
nevertheless, what such determinations are in reason,
and with reference to what is in itself,
this is precisely their nature.
This result, grasped in its positive aspect, is nothing else but
the inner negativity of the determinations which is their self-moving soul,
the principle of all natural and spiritual life.
But if one stays fixed at the abstract negative aspect of dialectics,
the result is only the commonplace that
reason is incapable of knowing the infinite –
a peculiar result indeed, for it says that,
since the infinite is what is rational,
reason is not capable of cognizing the rational.

It is in this dialectic as understood here,
and hence in grasping opposites in their unity,
or the positive in the negative,
that the speculative consists.
It is the most important aspect of dialectic,
but for the still unpracticed, unfree faculty of thought, the most difficult.
Such a faculty, if still occupied with breaking itself
free of the concrete representations of the senses and of ratiocination,
must first practice abstract thinking,
hold fast to concepts in their determinateness
and learn to gain knowledge by means of them.
An exposition of logic to this end would have, in its method,
to keep to a subject division as mentioned above,
and with regard to the more detailed content,
to the definitions given to the single concepts,
without getting itself involved in dialectic.
In external shape, it would turn out to be similar to
the usual presentation of this science,
yet would also depart from it in content
and, though of no use for the practice of speculative thinking,
it would however serve abstract thinking,
and this is a purpose which can never be realized
by a logic popularized with the additions of
psychological and anthropological materials.
What it would give to the mind is
the picture of a methodically ordered whole,
even though the soul of the edifice,
the method dwelling in the dialectic,
would not itself appear in it.

Finally, with respect to the education
and the relation of the individual to logic,
I would further remark that this science, like grammar,
appears in two different aspects or values.
It is one thing for one who comes to it
and to the sciences generally for the first time,
and something else for one who returns to it from these sciences.
He who is beginning to make his acquaintance
with grammar finds in its forms and laws
dry abstractions, arbitrary rules,
quite in general a disconnected aggregate of definitions
that have no other value or meaning than what they immediately signify;
at the start, there is nothing to be known in them except themselves.
On the other hand, he who has mastered a language
and is also acquainted with other languages
with which to compare it,
to such is given the capacity to feel
in the grammar of the language
the spirit and culture of a people;
the same rules and forms now have an enriched, living value.
In the medium of the language, he can recognize
the expression of spirit as spirit, and this is logic.
So, he who first comes to this science,
at first finds in logic an isolated system of abstractions
which, confined to itself, does not reach over
to embrace other forms of cognition and of science.
On the contrary, when held against the riches of the world-scenario,
against the apparently real content of the other sciences;
when compared with the promise of the absolute science
to unveil the essence of these riches,
to unveil the inner nature of spirit and of the world, the truth,
then in the abstractness of its shape,
in the colorlessness and stark simplicity of its pure determinations;
this science has rather the look of one who can sooner afford anything
than any such promise but stands penniless before those riches.
The first acquaintance with logic restricts its significance to it alone;
its content passes only for an isolated occupation
with thought determinations, next to which the other
scientific endeavors constitute a material and content of their own,
one over which logical thought may indeed have some formal influence,
but an influence which is more of their own making
and which, if need be, scientific form
and the study of this form can at any rate also dispense with.
The other sciences have on the whole discarded
the well-regulated method of proceeding
by way of definitions, axioms, theorems
and their proofs, and so on;
so-called natural logic has become their accepted norm
and this manages to do its work without any
specialized knowledge of thought itself.
All in all, the matter and the content of these sciences
stand totally independent of logic
and are also better suited to the senses, to feeling,
the imagination, and any kind of practical interest.

So logic must indeed at first be learned as something
which one may well understand and penetrate into
but in which, at the beginning, one misses
the scope, depth, and broader significance.
Only after a more profound acquaintance with the other sciences
does logic rise for subjective spirit
from a merely abstract universal
to a universal that encompasses
within itself the riches of the particular:
in the same way a moral maxim does not
possess in the mouth of a youngster
who otherwise understands it quite well
the meaning and scope that it has
in the spirit of a man with a lifetime of experience,
to whom therefore the weight of its content is expressed in full force.
Thus logic receives full appreciation of its value
only when it comes as the result of
the experience of the sciences;
then it displays itself to spirit as the universal truth,
not as a particular cognition alongside
another material and other realities,
but as the essence rather of this further content.

Now although this power of logic is not consciously present
to spirit at the beginning of its study,
such a study will nevertheless impart to it
the inward power which will lead it to the truth.
The system of logic is the realm of shadows,
the world of simple essentialities,
freed of all sensuous concretion.
To study this science, to dwell and to labor in this realm of shadows,
is the absolute culture and discipline of consciousness.
Its task is one which is remote from the intuitions
and the goals of the senses,
remote from feelings and from the world of merely fancied representation.
Considered from its negative side,
this task consists in holding off
the accidentality of ratiocinative thought
and the arbitrariness in the choice
to accept one ground as valid rather than its opposite.

But above all, thought thereby gains self-subsistence and independence.
It will make itself at home in abstractions
and in the ways of working with concepts without sensuous substrata,
will develop an unconscious power to assimilate in rational form
the otherwise dispersed manifold of cognitions and sciences,
the power to grasp and hold them in their essentiality,
to strip them of every externality and in this way
to abstract from them the logical element –
or what is the same thing,
the power to fill the abstract groundwork of logic
previously acquired through study
with the content of every truth,
and to bestow upon this content the value of a universal
which no longer stands as a particular alongside other particulars
but embraces them all in its grasp and is their essence,
the absolutely true.

GENERAL DIVISION OF THE LOGIC

It follows from what has been said regarding the concept of this science
and where its justification lies
that the general division of it can be only provisional here –
can be given, as it were, only in so far as the author is
already acquainted with the science
and is consequently historically in a position
to indicate in advance the main distinctions
in which the concept assumes determination as it develops.

Still, the attempt can be made to elicit in advance
some general understanding of what is required
for performing the division,
although even here recourse must be made to a procedural method
which will attain full disclosure and justification only within the science. –
One must thus be reminded, first and foremost, that presupposed here
is that the division must be connected with the concept,
or rather must lie in the concept itself.
The concept is not indeterminate but is determinate within;
the division, however, expresses this determinateness of
the concept in developed form;
it is the parting of the concept in judgment,
not a judgment about some subject matter or other picked out externally,
but the judging, that is, the determining, of the concept within it.
Right-angularity, acute-angularity, etc., or equilaterality,
which are the determinations according to which triangles are divided,
do not lie in the determinateness of the triangle itself,
that is, not in what is usually called the concept of a triangle,
no more than in the concept of animal in general, or of mammal, bird, etc.,
one can find the determinations according to which animal in general is
divided into mammal, bird, etc.,
and these classes are then divided into further genera.
Such determinations are taken from elsewhere, from empirical intuition;
they come to those so-called concepts from without.
In the philosophical treatment of division,
the concept must show that it itself holds
the source of the determinations.

But in the Introduction, the concept of logic was itself presented as
the result of a science that transcends it,
and hence as equally a presupposition here.
Accordingly, logic was defined as the science of pure thought –
the science that has pure knowledge for its principle
and is a unity which is not abstract but living and concrete,
so that the opposition of consciousness
between a being subjectively existing for itself,
and another but objectively existing such being,
has been overcome in it,
and being is known to be in itself a pure concept
and the pure concept to be true being.
These, then, are the two moments contained in logic.
But they are now known to exist inseparably,
not as in consciousness, where each exists for itself;
it is for this reason and this reason alone,
because they are at the same time known to be distinct
(yet not to exist for themselves),
that their unity is not abstract, dead and inert, but concrete.

This unity also constitutes the logical principle as element,
so that the development of the distinction
which is from the start present in it
proceeds only inside this element.
For since the division is, as we said,
the parting or the judgment of the concept –
is the positing of the determination which is already immanent in it
and therefore the positing of its distinction –
this positing must not be understood as resolving that
concrete unity back into its determinations,
as if these were to exist on their own,
for this would be here a vacuous return to the previous standpoint,
to the opposition of consciousness.
But this opposition has vanished; the unity remains the element,
and the distinctions of the division and of the development in general
no longer transgress that unity.
Therefore the earlier determinations which (on the pathway to truth)
existed for themselves,
as for instance that of subjective and objective,
or also of thought and being, of concept and reality,
no matter from what standpoint they were determined, are
now in their truth, that is, in their unity, reduced to forms.
In their difference they therefore implicitly remain, in themselves,
the whole concept, and this concept is posited in the division
only under its own determinations.

Thus it is the whole concept which we must consider,
first as existent concept, and then as concept;
in the one case it is concept only implicitly, in itself,
the concept of reality or being;
in the other, it is the concept as such,
the concept that exists for itself
(in more concrete forms, the concept as it is in the human being,
who is endowed with thought,
and also in the sentient animal and in general in organic individuality,
although, of course, in these last it is not conscious and still less known;
it is concept in itself only in inorganic nature). –
Accordingly, the first division must be between the logic of
the concept as being and of the concept as concept,
or (if we want to avail ourselves of otherwise familiar,
but very indeterminate and therefore very ambiguous expressions)
in objective and subjective logic.
However, in accordance with the elemental unity
which is immanent in the concept as basis,
and hence in accordance with
the inseparability of the concept’s determinations,
such determinations, even as differentiated
(the concept is posited in their difference),
must also stand at least in reference to each another.
There results a sphere of mediation,
the concept as a system of reflected determinations,
that is, of being as it passes over into the initselfness of the concept –
a concept which is in this way not yet posited for itself as such
but is also fettered by an immediate being still external to it.
This sphere is the doctrine of essence that stands between
the doctrine of being and of the concept. –
In the general division of logic in this work,
it has been included in objective logic because,
although essence is indeed already inwardness,
the character of subject is to be reserved nominatim for the concept.

Recently Kant has opposed to what has
usually been called “logic” another,
namely a transcendental logic.
What has been called objective logic here would correspond
in part to what for him is transcendental logic.
Kant distinguishes it from what he calls general logic because
(a) it deals with concepts that refer to intended objects a priori,
and hence does not abstract from all
the content of objective cognition,
or in that it contains the rules of the pure thinking
of an intended object; and because
(b) it thereby goes to the source of our cognition
so far as this cognition cannot be attributed to the intended objects. –
It is to this second aspect that
Kant’s philosophical interest is exclusively directed.
His principal idea is to vindicate the categories for self-consciousness
understood as the  subjective “I.”
Because of this determination, his point of view remains
confined within consciousness and its opposition,
and, besides the empirical element of feeling and intuition,
is left with something else not posited
or determined by thinking self-consciousness,
a thing-in-itself, something alien and external to thinking –
although it is easy to see that such an abstract entity
as the thing-in-itself is itself only the product of thought,
and of merely abstractive thought at that. –
If other Kantians have expanded on the determining
of the intended object by the “I”
by saying that the objectifying of the “I” is to be regarded
as an original and necessary deed of consciousness,
so that in this original deed there is not yet the
representation of the “I” –
which would be only a consciousness of that consciousness,
or itself an objectifying of that consciousness –
then this objectifying deed, liberated from the opposition of consciousness,
is closer to what may be taken simply as thinking as such.
But this deed should no longer be called consciousness;
for consciousness holds within itself the opposition of
the “I” and its intended object
which is not to be found in that original deed.
The name “consciousness” gives it more of a semblance of subjectivity
than does the term “thought,” which here, however,
is to be taken in the absolute sense of infinite thought,
not as encumbered by the finitude of consciousness;
in short, thought as such.

Now because the interest of the Kantian philosophy was
directed to the so-called transcendental nature of the categories,
the treatment itself of such categories came up empty.
What they are in themselves apart from
their abstract relation to the “I,”
a relation which is the same for all,
how they are determined and related to each other,
this was not made a subject of consideration,
and therefore knowledge of their nature
was not in the least advanced by this philosophy.
What alone is of interest in this connection
comes only in the Critique of Ideas. –
However, if there was to be a real progress in philosophy,
it was necessary that the interest of thought
should be drawn to the consideration of the formal side,
of the “I,” of consciousness as such, that is,
of the abstract reference of a subjective awareness to
an object, and that in this way the path should be opened
for the cognition of the infinite form, that is, of the concept.
Yet, in order to arrive at this cognition,
the finite determinateness in which
that form is as “I,” as consciousness, must be shed.
The form, when thought out in its purity,
will then have within itself the capacity
to determine itself, that is, to give itself a content,
and to give it as a necessary content –
as a system of thought-determinations.

The objective logic thus takes the place
rather of the former metaphysics
which was supposed to be the scientific edifice of the world
as constructed by thoughts alone. –
If we look at the final shape in the elaboration of this science,
then it is ontology which objective logic
most directly  replaces in the first instance,
that is, that part of metaphysics intended to
investigate the nature of ens in general
(and ens comprises within itself both being and essence,
a distinction for which the German language
has fortunately preserved different expressions). –
But objective logic comprises within itself
also the rest of metaphysics,
the metaphysics which sought to comprehend
with the pure forms of thought such particular substrata,
originally drawn from the imagination,
as the soul, the world, and God,
and in this type of consideration
the determinations of thought  constituted the essential factor.
Logic, however, considers these forms free of those substrata,
which are the subjects of figurative representation,
considers their nature and value in and for themselves.
That metaphysics neglected to do this,
and it therefore incurred the just reproach
that it employed the pure forms of thought uncritically,
without previously investigating whether and how
they could be the determinations of the thing-in-itself,
to use Kant’s expression –
or more precisely, of the rational. –
The objective logic is therefore
the true critique of such determinations –
a critique that considers them,
not according to the abstract form of the a priori
as contrasted with the a posteriori,
but in themselves according to their particular content.

The subjective logic is the logic of the concept –
of essence which has sublated its reference to a being
or to its reflective shine,
and in its determination is no longer external but something subjective,
freely self-subsisting, self-determining, or rather the subject itself. –
Since subjective brings with it the misconception of
“accidental” and “arbitrary”and also, in general,
of determinations that belong to the form of consciousness,
no particular weight is to be attached here to
the distinction of subjective and objective.
This is a distinction which will be more precisely developed
later in the logic itself.

Logic thus divides overall into objective and subjective logic,
but more specifically it has three parts:

I. The Logic of Being,
II. The Logic of Essence, and
III. The Logic of the Concept.
